MODES OF PLAY
There are three main modes of play in a Pathfinder game: 
encounter mode, exploration mode, and downtime mode. 
The different modes of play are discussed in more detail 
starting on page 290, but knowing the following basics 
before beginning a game is helpful. Encounter mode is made up of rounds, during which 
each player in turn can spend actions to advance the group's 
goals, whether the party wants to sneak past a crowd or 
defeat some enemies. This is the most mechanically rigorous 
mode of play and works best when running combat or 
when a situation changes from moment to moment. Exploration mode happens when the characters 
travel significant distances, delve into mysterious new 
locations, interact with nonplayer characters outside of 
combat or simply watch for danger. In this mode, time 
moves at whatever pace the GM sees fit. Players still have 
opportunities to affect the game world, though in a much 
more free-form manner. Exploration mode takes place 
between encounters and often sets the stage for round-by-round play.
Downtime takes place when the characters aren't 
facing any active threats. Downtime typically happens 
while the characters are within the safety and security of 
a settlement, and it allows them to train, employ a trade, 
and experience life beyond their perilous adventures. These three modes are distinct, but the game's flow 
between them isn't always clear-cut. It's possible that a 
day that starts with downtime will involve the exploration 
of the city's sewage tunnels, leading the characters to the 
secret base of a depraved cult and then into an encounter 
with the cultists. The more you play the game, the more 
you'll see that each mode features of its own play methods, 
but moving from mode to mode has few hard boundaries. 
ACTING AND EFFECTS
The main way that characters and their adversaries 
affect the world of Pathfinder is by spending actions and 
producing effects. This is especially the case in encounter 
play, where every action counts.
During encounter mode, each player character gains 
3 actions and 1 reaction to use each round. Each player 
character can also take any number of free actions. Rules 
elements that describe actions, reactions, or free actions 
carry special symbols to indicate this, as described below. 
ACTIONS
Actions start with this symbol: . You can use 3 actions 
on your turn, in any order you see fit. When you use an 
action, you generate an effect. Sometimes this effect is 
automatic. Other times, actions necessitate that you roll 
a die and generate an effect based on this roll. More 
information about die rolling and its importance to the 
game is found in the Die Rolls section on page 8. 
REACTIONS
Reactions start with this symbol: . Reactions are similar 
to actions in their effects, but are used differently. You can 
spend only 1 reaction per round, and only when its specific 
trigger is fulfilled. You can use your reaction on your turn 
or another character's turn, as long as the trigger is satisfied 
(often, the trigger is another creature's action). 
 FREE ACTIONS
 Free actions start with this symbol: 
. Free actions follow 
the same trigger rules as reactions, and like reactions, you 
can use them on your turn or on another character's turn. 
Unlike with actions or reactions, you can use as many 
free actions per round as you like, as long as their triggers 
occur. However, a specific trigger can trigger only one of a 
character's free actions.
BASIC CONCEPTS8 
ACTIVITIES
Activities are special tasks that you complete by spending 
1 or more actions. Usually, they take 2 or more actions and 
let you do more than a single action would allow. All tasks 
that take longer than a turn are activities. Spellcasting is 
one of the most common activities, as most spells require 
you to spend several actions in a sequence to create their 
effects. Once you spend the last action required, your 
activity is complete and its effects occur. A few activities 
can be performed by spending a free action or a reaction, 
such as spells you can cast in an instant. Activities that use 
2 actions start with this symbol: . Activities that use 3 
actions start with this symbol: . FORMAT OF RULES ELEMENTS
In Pathfinder, player characters use rules elements to act 
or in response to the situation. Many are feats, which are 
mechanical elements that characters can access through 
leveling up or making certain character creation choices. 
Others are more basic elements of the game to which all 
characters have access from the beginning of play.
 Regardless of the type of game mechanic, rules elements 
are always presented in the following format. Entries are 
omitted from the game's rules text when they don't apply, 
so not all rules elements have all of the entries given below. 
Actions, reactions, and free actions have an appropriate 
icon next to them to indicate their type. An activity that 
can be completed in a single turn has a number of icons 
indicating how many actions are required to complete 
it; activities that take more than a single turn to perform 
omit these icons. When a certain level is required before 
the element can be accessed, that level is indicated to the 
right of the name. Rules also often have one or more traits 
associated with them; for more about traits, see page 10. FEAT OR ACTION NAME
 LEVEL
 Prerequisites
 Any minimum ability score, feats, 
proficiency rank, or other prerequisites you must have before you 
can access this element is listed here. The element's level is always 
an additional prerequisite.
Frequency
This is the limit on how many times you can use an 
ability within a certain length of time. 
Cost 
Any extra cost of materials to use the ability (for instance, in 
spells that require special reagents) is listed here.
Trigger
Reactions and free actions both have triggers that must 
be met in order to use them. The trigger is listed here.
Requirements
Sometimes you must have a certain item or be in a 
certain circumstance to use an ability. If so, it's listed in this section.
This section describes the Effects or benefits of a rules element. 
If the rule is an action, activity, reaction, or free action, it explains 
what the Effect is or what you must roll to determine the Effect. 
If it's a feat that modifies an existing action or grants a constant 
Effect, the benefit is explained here.
Special 
Any special qualities of the rule are explained in 
this section. Usually the special section appears in a feat you can 
select more than once, and explains what happens when you do. 
Traits
DIE ROLLS
Rolling dice to determine a character's success or failure at 
a given task is a core element of the game. Pathfinder uses 
a set of polyhedral dice to accomplish this; most important 
is the 20-sided die, often abbreviated as d20. Many rolls 
in Pathfinder involve rolling a d20, adding bonuses or 
penalties, and telling the GM the result so she can compare 
it to the number representing the difficult of the task. This is 
called a check. More about rolls, checks, bonuses, penalties, 
and other key elements of the game is described beginning 
on page 290, but the following basics are good to know:

Ł Rolling high is good.
 You want your roll's total to meet 
or exceed the threshold for success, which is called the 
Difficulty Class (or DC). The DC is a number chosen by 
the GM if you're going up against a challenge in the 
environment. If you're rolling against a creature, you'll 
instead use a DC based on one of its statistics. More about 
Difficulty Classes is on page 291.
Ł Rolling 20 is better!
 Rolling a 20 on the die means you 
critically succeed, which often has a greater Effect than 
normal. You also gain a critical success if your total meets 
or exceeds the Difficulty Class by 10 or more. More about 
critical successes is on page 292.
Ł Rolling 1 is bad.
 When you do, you critically fail your check. 
This is even worse than a regular failure. You also critically 
fail if your total is lower than the Difficulty Class by 10 or 
more. More about critical failures is on page 292.
YOUR DIFFICULTY CLASS
Often, you roll dice against a Difficulty Class determined 
by the GM. But when a creature or situation is testing your 
character's ability, it attempts a check against a Difficulty 
Class based on the most relevant of your character's 
statistics. The DC for any statistic is 10 plus all the same 
modifiers you'd add to a d20 roll using that statistic. 
MODIFIERS, 
BONUSES, AND PENALTIES
You can get the following types of modifiers, bonuses, and 
penalties on your rolls and DCs. More about modifiers, 
bonuses, and penalties can be found on page 290.
Ability Modifier
Almost all rolls are keyed to an ability score. Your 
ability modifiers are derived from your ability scores, as described on page 20. For example, a Strength of 10 gives you a +0 Strength modifier, while a Charisma of 17 gives 
you a +3 Charisma modifier. You add only one ability 
modifier to a roll. 
Proficiency Modifier
For most of your statistics, your class and other character 
choices will give you a proficiency rank. When you make a 
roll, you add a proficiency modifier that depends on your 
level and your proficiency rank in the statistic or item you 
are using. You add only one proficiency modifier to a roll.
You're untrained if you have little or no knowledge in 
the statistic or item. Your proficiency modifier is equal to 
your level minus 2. Unless your class or another choice 
you've made gives you a different rank of proficiency, 
you're untrained. If you've been trained in the statistic or item, your 
proficiency modifier is equal to your level. As an expert, you are highly trained in the statistic or 
item. Your proficiency modifier is equal to your level plus 1.
At a master rank, you've achieved world-class 
proficiency in the statistic or item. Your proficiency 
modifier is equal to your character level plus 2. If you're legendary, your statistic or familiarity with 
the item is so high that you'll go down in history. Your 
proficiency modifier is equal to your level plus 3. When you have a proficiency rank, you also have all 
lower ranks except for untrained. Thus, if you have master 
proficiency rank, you also have the expert and trained 
proficiency ranks (though you use only the highest modifier).
Bonuses and Penalties
Other bonuses and penalties come in several types. If you 
have more than one bonus or penalty of the same type, 
you use only the highest bonus or penalty.
KEY TERMS
As you navigate this book, it's helpful to be familiar 
with the key basic terms found in this section. For a full 
glossary of game terms, see page 420.
ABILITY SCORE
Each creature has six ability scores: Strength, Dexterity, 
Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma. These 
scores represent a creature's raw potential and basic 
attributes. The higher the score, the greater the creature's 
potential in that ability score. You can learn more about 
ability scores on page 18. 
ALIGNMENT
Alignment represents a creature's basic moral and ethical 
attitude. See page 16 for more details. 
ANCESTRY
An ancestry is the broad family of people that a character 
or creature belongs to. Ancestry determines a character's 
starting Hit Points, languages, Speed, and senses, and it 
grants access to a set of ancestry feats. 
ARMOR CLASS (AC)
 All creatures in the game have an Armor Class. This score 
represents how hard it is to hit and damage a creature. It 
typically serves as the Difficulty Class for hitting a creature 
with an attack. Learn more on page 16. 
ATTACK
When a creature tries to harm another creature, it makes 
an attack roll against the target's Armor Class. Most 
attacks use the Strike action (see page 308), but some 
spells and other abilities are also attacks. 
CLASS
A class represents the main adventuring profession chosen 
by a character. A character's class determines most of their 
proficiencies, grants the character a certain number of Hit 
Points when they gain a new level, and gives access to a set 
of class feats. Classes appear in Chapter 3.
CONDITION
An ongoing effect that changes how you can act or alters 
some of your statistics is called a condition. These often 
come from spells. Some frequently occurring conditions 
appear on page 320. FEAT
A feat is an ability that a character gains from their ancestry, 
background, class, general training, or skill training. Some 
feats grant an action, activity, free action, or reaction.
GAME MASTER (GM)
The Game Master is the player who adjudicates the rules 
and controls the various elements of the Pathfinder story 
and world that the other players explore. A GM's duty 
is to provide a fair and fun game—she wants the other 
players to ultimately succeed in their goals, but only after 
much danger and many heroic trials. 
GOLARION
Pathfinder is set on Golarion, a world with a rich diversity of peoples, filled with exciting locations to 
explore and deadly villains to challenge heroes of any level. Throughout this book there are references to 
Golarion, most notably in discussion of the deities that your character can choose to venerate. You can set your 
game in Golarion or any other world of your choosing, using these rules to create a rich setting all your own. For more information on Golarion, see Pathfinder Campaign Setting: The Inner Sea World Guide
and other books in the Pathfinder Campaign Setting line. 
HIT POINTS (HP)
Hit Points represent the amount of punishment a creature 
can take before it falls unconscious and begins dying. 
Damage decreases Hit Points on a 1-to-1 basis, while 
healing restores Hit Points at the same rate. Learn more 
on page 294.
INITIATIVE
At the start of an encounter, all creatures involved roll 
for initiative to determine the order the participants act 
during combat. The higher the result of the roll, the earlier 
a creature gets to act. Usually you'll use Perception for 
your initiative rolls, but you might roll some kind of skill 
check instead. Learn more on page 304.
10 
LEVEL
A level is a number that measures something's overall power. 
A character has a character level, ranging from 1 to 20, 
representing their level of experience. Monsters, hazards, 
and afflictions have levels from 0 to 20 or higher that 
measure the danger they pose. An item's level indicates its 
power and suitability as treasure, also from 0 to 20 or higher.
Spells have levels ranging from 1 to 10, which measure 
their power and relate to a creature's ability to cast them.
NONPLAYER CHARACTER (NPC)
A nonplayer character is controlled by the GM for the 
purpose of interacting with players and helping advance 
the story.
PERCEPTION
Perception measures your character's ability to notice 
hidden objects or unusual situations, and it usually 
determines how quickly you spring into action in combat. 
Learn more on page 301.
PLAYER CHARACTER (PC)
This is a character created and controlled by a player.
RARITY
Nearly all elements of the game are associated with a 
rarity—that is, how often they're encountered in the 
game's world. Rarity primarily applies to equipment and 
magic items, but spells, feats, and other mechanical aspects 
of the game also each have a specific rarity. 
The majority of such elements are commonly found 
within the world, which means that anyone can buy 
them, in the case of items, or access them, in the case of 
feats, without any trouble. The common rarity, marked in 
black, is the default. The uncommon rarity indicates an element available 
only to those who have been initiated into a special kind 
of training, grow up in a certain culture, or come from a 
particular part of the world. A character can't take these 
options by default. Specific choices, such as class features 
or backgrounds, might give access to certain uncommon 
elements. The GM can grant any character access to 
uncommon options if she so chooses. The level (or type of 
element for those without levels) is marked in red. Elements that are rare are practically unknown or 
impossible to find in the game world. These elements 
appear in the game only if the GM chooses to include 
them. Rare elements are marked in orange. The unique rarity indicates an element that is one of 
a kind. This means that there's only one in the game's 
world. Artifacts, for example, are often unique. Unique 
elements are marked in blue (one appears in Pathfinder Playtest Adventure: Doomsday Dawn).
ROLEPLAYING
Describing a character's actions, often while acting from 
the perspective of the character, is called roleplaying. When 
a player speaks or describes action from the perspective of 
a character, they are "in character."
SAVING THROW (SAVE)
When a creature is subject to dangerous effects it must 
attempt to avoid with its body or mind, it can often roll 
a saving throw to mitigate the effect. You roll a saving 
throw automatically—you don't have to use an action 
or a reaction. Unlike most types of checks, the character 
who isn't acting rolls the d20 for a saving throw and the 
creature who is acting generates the DC. There are three types of saving throws: Fortitude (to 
resist poisons, diseases, and physical effects), Reflex (to 
mitigate effects that you could quickly dodge), and Will 
(to resist effects that target the mind and personality). You 
can learn more on page 17.
SKILL
A skill represents a creature's ability to perform certain 
tasks that require training to master. Skills typically list 
ways you can use them even if you're untrained in the 
skill, followed by uses that require you to be trained in the 
skill. You can learn more on page 142.
SPEED
Speed is the number of feet that a character can move 
using the Stride action (see page 310).
SPELL
Spells are magical effects generated by using an activity to 
cast them. Spells specify what they target, their effects, the 
actions needed to cast them, and how they can be resisted. 
Learn more on page 192.
STRIDE
You can move up to your Speed with the Stride action, 
which appears on page 308.
STRIKE
You use the Strike action to make an attack. You can find 
it on page 308.
TRAIT
A trait is an indicator that a rules element obeys special 
rules or has certain features. Often, traits have rules 
attached that govern how something works. Other times, 
they are indicators of how other rules interact with an 
ability, creature, item, or other rules element that has that 
trait. An index of all the traits used in this book appears 
in Appendix A: Traits on page 414.
TURN
During the course of a round, each creature takes a single 
turn. A creature can typically use up to 3 actions during 
its turn. Learn more on page 304.

DICE
Pathfinder requires a set of polyhedral dice. When these 
are mentioned in the text, they'll have a "d" followed by the 
number of sides of the die you're supposed to use. If you're 
using multiple dice, a number at the start shows how many 
you should roll. For example, "4d6" means you're rolling four 
six-sided dice. Pathfinder uses the following dice: 4-sided 
(d4), 6-sided (d6), 8-sided (d8), 10-sided (d10), 12-sided (d12), 
and 20-sided (d20).
CHARACTER CREATION
When you sit down to play Pathfinder as a player, 
the first thing you need to do is create a character 
whose adventures you'll explore in the game. It's up 
to you to imagine your character's past experiences, 
personality, and worldview, as these will set the stage 
for your roleplaying during the game. You'll use the 
game's mechanics to determine your character's starting 
capabilities at various tasks and the special abilities she 
can use during the game. This section provides a step-by-step guide 
for creating a character using the Pathfinder rules. These steps are presented 
in a suggested order, but you should feel free 
to complete them in the order you prefer. In some cases, 
where the rules systems involved in the following steps need more explanation, 
they refer to sections that appear later in this chapter.
Many of the steps below instruct you to fill out 
fields on your character sheet (see below), but note 
that the character sheet is arranged for ease of use 
during gameplay rather than the order of steps in 
character creation. Additionally, the fields that appear 
on character sheets are comprehensive, and not all 
characters necessarily have something to put in each 
field—all characters might not have access to a reaction 
at 1st level, for example. If a field on your character 
sheet is not applicable to your character, just leave that 
field blank. Each step of character creation detailed on 
the following pages is marked with a corresponding 
number on the sample character sheet below to show 
you where to fill in information in the appropriate field. 
Fields that need to be filled in on the second or third 
page of the sheet are called out in the text. If you're 
creating a higher-level character, it's a good 
idea to begin with these instructions before progressing 
to page 278 for instructions on leveling up characters.
12 
What sort of hero do you want to play? The answer 
to this question might be as simple as "a brave warrior," or as complicated as "the child of 
elven wanderers who raised this character in a majority-human city devoted to Sarenrae, the Dawnflower and goddess of the sun." During this step, it's a good idea to 
decide the general thrust of your character's personality, 
sketching out a few details about her past and thinking about how and why she adventures. You'll likely want 
to peruse Pathfinder's available ancestries, backgrounds, 
and classes. The tables on page 13 might also help you match your concept with some basic rules elements. Below are a number of ways you could approach 
creating your character concept. Once you have a good 
idea of the type of character you'd like to play, move on 
to Step 2. 
ANCESTRY, BACKGROUND, CLASS, OR DETAILS
If one of Pathfinder's character ancestries, backgrounds, 
or classes particularly intrigues you, it's easy to build 
a character concept around one or more of these options. Table 1–1: Ancestries and Table 1–2: Classes 
on page 13 give a brief overview of each option, with much more detail provided in Chapters 2 and 3, respectively. Additionally, the game has a large number 
of backgrounds to choose from that represent your 
character's upbringing, her family's livelihood, or her 
earliest profession. Backgrounds are detailed later in Chapter 2, beginning on page 38.
Building a character around a specific ancestry, 
background, or class can be a fun exercise in interacting 
with the world's lore. You might consider whether you'd 
like to build a typical member of your character's ancestry 
or class, as described in the relevant entry, or whether 
you'd prefer to play a character who defies commonly held 
notions about her people. For example, you could play a 
dwarf with a wide-eyed sense of wondrous innocence and 
zest for change, or a performing rogue capable of amazing 
acrobatic feats but with little interest in sneaking about. 
Of course, you can always build a concept from any 
aspect of a character's details. You can use roleplaying 
to challenge not only the norms of Pathfinder's fictional 
world, but also real-life societal norms. Your character 
might challenge binary gender notions, explore cultural 
identity, have a disability, have any sexual orientation, or 
any combination of these suggestions. Your character can 
live any life you see fit. After you've figured out your character's concept and 
background, you can have some fun coming up with an 
appropriate name for character!
FAITH
Perhaps you'd like to play a character who is a devout believer in the faith of a specific deity. Pathfinder is a rich 
world full of myriad deities whose faiths and philosophies span a wide range, from Cayden Cailean, the Drunken 
Hero of good-hearted adventuring; to Desna, the Song of Spheres and goddess of dreaming and the stars; to Iomedae, the Inheritor, goddess of honor, justice, and 
rulership. A full list of Pathfinder's major deities is on page 
288. Your character might be so drawn to a particular 
faith that you decide she should be a cleric or paladin of that deity, or your character might instead simply be the 
child of strongly devoted parishioners, or a lay worshiper who applies her faith's teachings to daily life.
YOUR ALLIES
Before a game begins, it's always a good idea for the 
players to discuss how their characters might know each 
other and work together throughout the course of their 
adventures. You might even want to coordinate with 
the other players when forming your character concept, 
although you should never feel pressured into making 
and playing a character that doesn't interest you. 
Such coordination might involve your characters' 
backstories, such as having them hail from the same 
village or creating characters who are relatives. It 
might also involve mechanical aspects, such as creating 
characters whose abilities in combat complement each 
other. In the latter case, it can be helpful for a party to 
include characters who deal damage, characters who can 
absorb damage, and characters who can provide healing. 
However, Pathfinder's classes include a lot of choices, and 
there are many options for building each type of character, 
so don't let these broad categories restrain your decisions!
ABILITY SCORES
One of the simplest places to start your character concept 
is with their ability scores. Do you want your character 
to be the fastest, the smartest, or the most charming? 
Then enhance your character's Dexterity, Intelligence, or 
Charisma score accordingly! See the Ability Scores section 
on page 18 for more about which ability scores are tied 
to which inherent qualities. When you build a character 
around having one or more strong ability scores, choose a 
class that has one of those as the key ability score. You may 
also want to choose an ancestry and a background that also 
boost that score, but you can always use your free ability 
boosts if they don't line up. When it comes time to assign 
your skill proficiencies, pick skills tied to your best abilities. 
CHARACTER SHEET
Once you've developed your character's concept, jot a few 
sentences summarizing it under the Notes section on the 
third page. Record any of the details you've already decided, 
such as your character's name, on the appropriate lines on 
the first page, indicated on the sample character sheet by 
the number 1.
1 DETERMINE YOUR CHARACTER'S CONCEPT
13 
TABLE 1–1: ANCESTRIES
Ancestry   
Dwarf
Description
Dwarves are a short, stocky people who are often stubborn, fierce, 
and devoted.
Ability Boosts
Constitution, Wisdom, Free 
Ability Flaw
Charisma
Elf
Ability Boosts
Elves are a tall, slender, long-lived people whose culture peaked 
long ago. 
Dexterity, Intelligence, Free Constitution
Gnome
Gnomes are a short, slight, mercurial people who crave change 
and excitement.
Ability Boosts
Constitution, Charisma, Free 
Ability Flaw
Strength
Goblin
Goblins are a short, scrappy, energetic people who have spent 
millennia maligned and feared. 
Ability Boosts
Dexterity, Charisma, Free 
Ability Flaw
Wisdom
Halfling
Halflings are a short, adaptable people who exhibit remarkable 
curiosity and humor.
Ability Boosts
Dexterity, Wisdom, Free 
Ability Flaw
Strength
Human*
Humans are incredibly diverse in terms of everything from their 
body size to their perspectives and personalities.
Ability Boosts
Free, Free
Half-elf and half-orc ancestries are accessible through human ancestry feats.
TABLE 1–2: CLASSES
ClassDescriptionKey Ability Score*
Secondary Ability Scores
Alchemist
The alchemist throws alchemical bombs and drinks 
concoctions of his own making during combat.
Intelligence Constitution, Dexterity
Barbarian
The barbarian flies into a rage on the battlefield, smashing 
foes with abandon. Strength, Constitution, Dexterity 
Bard 
Performance and secrets of the occult enable the bard to 
distract foes and inspire allies.
Charisma
Constitution, Dexterity
Cleric
The cleric calls on the power of a deity to cast spells that can 
heal allies or harm foes. Wisdom
Charisma, Constitution
Druid
The druid uses the natural world's magic to bolster her and 
her allies' strength while calling pain down upon enemies.
Wisdom
Constitution, Dexterity
Fighter
The fighter is a master of weapons, martial techniques, and 
powerful attack combinations.
Dexterity or Strength
Constitution
Monk
The monk spins the secrets of martial arts into dazzling 
displays of battlefield prowess.
Dexterity or Strength
Constitution, Wisdom
Paladin
The paladin is a champion of her deity who uses divine power 
to enhance her heroics and protect her allies.
Strength
Charisma, Constitution
Ranger
The ranger is a master of using his surroundings, including 
traps and animal allies, to harry enemies. Dexterity or Strength
Constitution, Wisdom
Rogue
The rogue is a multitalented master of skullduggery who 
strikes when enemies least expect it.
Dexterity
Charisma, Constitution
Sorcerer
The sorcerer's magical might flows through her blood and 
manifests as fantastic spells and abilities. Charisma
Dexterity, Constitution
Wizard
The wizard is an eminent scholar whose reservoirs of arcane 
knowledge power his wondrous spells and abilities.
Intelligence
Dexterity, Constitution
* Characters each receive an ability boost in their class's key ability score. 
ANCESTRIES AND CLASSES
Each player takes a different approach to character creation; some focus on details that best fit the story, some look for combinations 
that synergize well mechanically, and others combine aspects of these approaches. There is no wrong way to build a character!
The following tables provide at-a-glance information for those looking to optimize their starting ability scores. For entries in 
Table
 1–1: Ancestries that say "free," you can choose which ability score receives the provided ability boost. This table also indicates 
any ability flaws that an ancestry might have. You can find more about ability boosts and ability flaws in Ability Scores on page 18.
Table 1–2: Classes lists each class's key ability score—the ability score used to calculate the potency of many of their class abilities. 
Characters receive an ability boost in that ability score when they choose their class. This table also lists one or more secondary 
ability scores that can be important to members of that class.
Keep in mind that a character's background also aflects her ability scores, though there's more flexibility in the ability boosts that 
backgrounds provide than in those from classes. For descriptions of the available backgrounds, see page 38.
142 
CHOOSE AN ANCESTRY
Your character's ancestry is one of her most important 
characteristics. Table 1–1: Ancestries on page 13 provides 
an overview of Pathfinder's core ancestry options, and 
each ancestry is fully detailed in Chapter 2. Ancestry 
affects your character's ability scores, total Hit Points, 
size, Speed, languages, and much more. Additionally, at 
1st level, your character receives an ancestry feat that 
represents an ability or quality she was born with or 
trained in at an early age. 
CHARACTER SHEET
Write your character's ancestry on the appropriate line at the 
top of your character sheet. Next to your ability scores, note 
the ability boosts and any flaw your character gains from her 
ancestry (ability scores are finalized during Step 5). Note the 
number of Hit Points she gains from her ancestry. Finally, on 
the appropriate lines, note your character's size, Speed, and 
languages. If your character's ancestry provides her with 
special abilities, note them in the appropriate spaces, such as 
darkvision in the Senses section on the first page. Note the 
ancestry feat your character receives in the proper section on 
your character sheet's second page.
3 CHOOSE A BACKGROUND
Your character's background might represent a special 
aptitude she's been honing since her youth, detail her 
upbringing, or illuminate some other aspect of her life 
before she became an adventurer. The available character 
backgrounds are described beginning on page 38. 
Backgrounds typically provide benefits to your character 
in the form of two ability boosts (one that can be applied 
to either of two specific ability scores, and one that is 
free), training in a Lore skill, and a specific skill feat. 
CHARACTER SHEET
Record your character's background on the appropriate 
line on your character sheet. Next to your ability scores, 
note the ability boosts the background provides (ability 
scores are finalized during Step 5). Record the skill feat 
the background provides in the proper section on your 
character sheet's second page. On the first page, in the 
Skills section, note the Lore skill in which your character is 
trained by checking the "T" box next to that skill name and 
noting the type of Lore.
4 CHOOSE A CLASS
At this point, you need to nail down your character's 
class. This affords her access to a suite of heroic abilities, 
determines how well she can attack, and governs 
how easily she can shake off or avoid certain harmful 
effects. Chapter 3 details each of the classes available in 
Pathfinder, and Table 1–2: Classes on page 13 provides 
an overview of each class and tells you which ability 
scores are important when playing that class, which can 
help guide your choice. You don't need to note all of your 
character's class features yet. You simply need to know 
which class you want to play, which determines the ability 
scores that will be most important for your character.
CHARACTER SHEET
Write your character's class at the top of your character 
sheet, then write "1" in the box after it to indicate that 
you're 1st level. Next to your ability scores, note the class's 
key ability score and the ability boost to it that the class 
provides. Don't worry about recording the rest of your 
character's class features and abilities yet—you'll handle 
that in Step 6.
5 FINALIZE YOUR ABILITY SCORES
Now that you've made the main mechanical choices 
about your character, it's time to finalize her ability 
scores. These important statistics determine a wide array 
of your character's capabilities and consist of six values: 
Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, 
and Charisma. As noted in other steps, your character's 
ancestry, background, and class all affect her ability scores. 
To learn how to calculate your character's ability scores, 
see page 19. That section also tells you how to determine 
your ability modifiers, which affect the calculation of 
many of the values on your character sheet, as described 
later in this section. 
CHARACTER SHEET
Once you've used the Ability Scores section on page 19 to 
calculate your character's ability scores, record them in the 
Score boxes in the proper section on your character sheet's 
first page. Using the ability modifiers table on page 20, write your character's modifiers in this section, too.
6 APPLY YOUR CLASS
Now, record all the benefits and class features that your 
character receives from the class you've chosen. Your 
character's class determines her key ability score, affects 
her total Hit Points, outfits her with various initial 
proficiencies, provides her with signature skills, and 
grants her class features and feats. To determine your character's total starting Hit Points, 
add together the number of Hit Points she gains from her 
ancestry (noted in Step 2) and the number of Hit Points 
she gains from her class. Now is a good time to note the "T," "E," "M," and 
"L"  fields that appear throughout your character sheet 
(standing for trained, expert, master, and legendary, 
respectively). These fields indicate your character's 
proficiency and determine which modifier your character 
applies to rolls and DCs when using certain mechanics. 
For example, if your character has a rank of trained in 
a given skill or ability, her modifier to rolls when using 
that skill or ability is equal to her level. (For more about 
proficiencies, see page 290.)
15 
CHARACTER SHEET
Once you've spent your character's starting wealth, note 
the equipment she owns as well as any remaining gp, sp, or 
cp she might still have. Record your character's weapons in 
the Melee Strikes and Ranged Strikes sections, depending 
on the weapon, and the rest of her equipment and her 
money in the appropriate section on your character sheet's 
second page. You'll calculate specific numbers for her 
melee Strikes, AC, and TAC in Step 9.
CHARACTER SHEET
Note your character's key ability score on your character 
sheet as well as her class DC, which is equal to 10 plus her 
key ability modifier plus her level (in this case, 1). Note her 
total starting Hit Points as well. Use the proficiency fields 
on your character sheet to note your character's initial 
proficiencies, including your character's proficiency ranks 
in Perception and saving throws. Record your character's 
weapon proficiencies in the appropriate section on the first 
page, and her armor proficiencies in the Armor Proficiencies 
section. Don't worry yet about finalizing any values for your 
character's AC, TAC, or Strikes—you'll handle that in Step 9. 
Indicate which skills are your character's signature skills and 
choose which skills your character is trained in, but don't 
worry about finalizing the total modifiers for your skills, 
either. You'll handle that in the next step. 
7 DETERMINE SKILL MODIFIERS
Now that you've noted which skills are signature skills for 
your character and decided which skills she's trained in, 
it's time to calculate her skill modifiers. In the second box 
to the right of each skill name on your character sheet, 
there's an abbreviation that reminds you of the ability 
score tied to that skill. When you attempt checks using a 
skill, add the indicated ability modifier to your proficiency 
modifier, if any, as well as any other applicable modifiers, 
bonuses, and penalties, to determine the modifier for your 
check. Many uses of certain skills require you to have 
at least a proficiency rank of trained in those skills, as 
further described in Chapter 4.
CHARACTER SHEET
Fill the relevant ability modifier in the box to the right of 
each skill name. Then, for skills in which you are trained, 
add your proficiency modifier to your ability modifier to 
determine the modifier your character has for each skill 
roll. For the rest of your character's skills, subtract the 
proficiency modifier for being untrained (your level – 2) 
from the relevant ability modifier, and record those totals 
on the lines below the respective skill names. If you have 
any modifiers, bonuses, or penalties from feats or abilities, 
add them to the totals if they always apply, or note them 
next to the total if they apply only in certain circumstances.
8 BUY EQUIPMENT
At 1st level, your character has 150 silver pieces (sp) to 
spend on armor, weapons, and other basic equipment. 
Armor and weapons are often the most important. 
Your character's class lists the types of weapons 
and armor that she is proficient with. Her 
weapon determines how much damage she 
deals in combat, and her armor influences 
her Armor Class, but these calculations are 
covered in more detail in Step 9. Don't neglect essentials 
such as food and traveling gear. For more on the equipment 
available and how much it costs, see Chapter 6.
169 
FILL IN THE FINISHING DETAILS
Now add the following details to your character sheet on 
the appropriate lines. 
AGE
Note your character's age. The description for your 
character's ancestry in Chapter 2 gives some guidance 
on the age ranges of members of that ancestry. Beyond 
that, you can play a character of whatever age you like. Your character's age is a major factor that shapes how 
she interacts with the world. There aren't any mechanical 
adjustments to your character for being particularly old, but you might want to take it into account when considering your starting ability scores and future advancement; for instance, an old and wise character might have a higher Wisdom score, so you might want 
to make sure to put one of your free ability boosts in Wisdom. Particularly young characters can change the 
tone of some of the game's threats, so it's recommended 
to play characters who are at least young adults. 
ALIGNMENT
Your character's alignment is an indicator of her current 
philosophy, behavior, or cosmic status with regard to her 
morality and personality tendencies. Her alignment can 
change in play as her beliefs change, and you realize that your character's actions reflect a different alignment than 
the one recorded on your character sheet. In most cases, you can just change your character's alignment to match 
your new discoveries about your character and continue playing. If you play a paladin, though, your character's 
alignment must be lawful good (see page 105), and if you play a cleric, her alignment must be one allowed for her deity (see page 70); otherwise, your character loses some of her class abilities until she atones. There are nine possible alignments in Pathfinder, 
as shown on the table. If your alignment has any 
components other than neutral, your character gains 
traits based on those alignment components. This 
might affect the way various spells, items, and creatures 
interact with your character. 
Your character's alignment is measured by two sets of 
opposed values: the axis of good and evil and the axis of law and chaos. A character who isn't committed strongly 
to either side is neutral on that axis. Keep in mind that 
alignment is a complicated subject, and even acts that might be considered good can be used for nefarious purposes, and vice versa. The GM is the final arbiter of questions about how specific actions might affect your character's alignment.
Law and Chaos
Your character has a lawful alignment if she values 
consistency, stability, and predictability over flexibility. 
Lawful characters have a set system in life, whether it's 
meticulously planning day-to-day activities, carefully following a set of official or unofficial laws, or strictly adhering to a code of honor.
On the other hand, if she values flexibility, creativity, 
and spontaneity over consistency, she has a chaotic 
alignment. That doesn't mean she decides her life by 
choosing randomly with a roll of the dice, however. 
Chaotic characters believe that lawful characters are too 
inflexible to judge each situation by its own merits or take 
advantage of opportunities, while lawful characters believe 
that chaotic characters are irresponsible and flighty.
Many characters are in the middle, generally obeying 
the law or following a code of conduct in many situations, 
but bending the rules when the situation requires it. If your 
character is in the middle, too, she is neutral on this axis. 
Good and Evil
Your character has a good alignment if she considers the 
happiness of others above her own and works selflessly to assist others, even those who aren't her friends and 
family. She is also good if she values protecting others 
from harm, even when it puts her in danger.
She has an evil alignment if she is willing to victimize others for her own selfish gain, and it's even more likely 
that she's evil if she enjoys inflicting harm or actively 
seeks to harm others. If your character falls somewhere in the middle, she's 
likely neutral on this axis. 
ARMOR CLASS (AC AND TAC)
Your character has two values to represent how difficult 
she is to strike in combat. These are her Armor Class (AC) 
and her Touch Armor Class (TAC). Most attacks will be 
made against your character's AC, while those that need 
only to touch her to be effective are made against her TAC.
To calculate her AC, add 10 plus her Dexterity 
modifier (up to her armor's Dexterity modifier cap), plus 
her proficiency modifier with her armor, plus her armor's 
item bonus to AC and any other bonuses and penalties that always apply. 
To calculate her TAC, add 10 plus her Dexterity 
modifier (up to her armor's Dexterity modifier cap), plus 
her proficiency modifier with her armor, plus her armor's 
item bonus to TAC and any other bonuses and penalties 
that always apply.
Spells or abilities that give your character a bonus or 
penalty to AC also give an equal bonus or penalty to TAC 
unless stated otherwise. TABLE 1–3: THE NINE ALIGNMENTS
GoodNeutralEvil
Lawful
Lawful good 
(LG)
Lawful neutral 
(NG)Lawful evil 
(LE)NeutralNeutral good (NG)True neutral 
(N)Neutral evil 
(NE)ChaoticChaotic good (CG)Chaotic neutral (CN)Chaotic evil 
(CE)
17 
BULK
Your character's maximum Bulk determines how much 
weight she can comfortably carry. If she is carrying a 
total amount of Bulk that equals or exceeds 5 plus her 
Strength modifier, she is encumbered. She cannot carry a 
total amount of Bulk that exceeds 10 plus her Strength 
modifier. Your character's current Bulk is equal to the sum 
of all of her items; keep in mind that every 10 light items 
make up 1 Bulk. For more about Bulk, see page 175.
DEITY
Note the deity your character worships, if any (clerics and 
paladins must worship a deity). See page 288 for more 
about Pathfinder's deities.
GENDER
Note your character's gender, if applicable. Characters of 
all genders are equally likely to become adventurers. 
HERO POINTS
Your character usually begins each game session with 
1 Hero Point, and can gain additional Hero Points 
throughout the course of the game for undertaking helpful 
tasks for the group or performing heroic deeds during her 
adventures. Your character can use Hero Points to gain 
certain benefits, such as staving off death, rerolling a d20, 
and the like. See page 300 for more about Hero Points. 
MELEE STRIKES AND RANGED STRIKES
Next where you've noted your character's melee and 
ranged weapons, calculate her modifiers to Strikes with 
those weapons and how much damage her Strikes deal. 
For modifiers to melee Strikes, add your character's 
proficiency modifier with her weapon plus her Strength 
modifier (unless a weapon's entry says otherwise) plus any 
item bonus from the weapon and any other bonuses and 
penalties that always apply. To the right of these lines, note 
how much damage her melee Strikes deal. This equals your 
character's weapon damage dice plus her Strength modifier.
For modifiers to ranged Strikes, add your character's 
proficiency modifier with her weapon plus her Dexterity modifier, plus any item bonus from her weapon and 
any other bonuses and penalties that always apply. 
To the right of these lines, note how much damage 
her ranged Strikes deal. For most ranged weapons, this is equal to your character's weapon damage 
dice. If the weapon has the thrown trait, also add her Strength modifier. If it has 
the propulsive trait, instead add half her Strength modifier.
PERCEPTION
Your character's Perception modifier measures 
how alert she is. This number is equal to her proficiency 
modifier in Perception plus her Wisdom modifier. For 
more about Perception, see page 301.
RESONANCE POINTS
Your character has a number of Resonance Points, which 
allow her to use magic items. Your character's total 
Resonance Points are equal to her Charisma modifier 
plus her level. On the second page, write your character's 
Charisma modifier and level in the appropriate fields. Her 
Resonance Point total goes in the fields marked Maximum 
and Current. For more on Resonance Points, see page 376.
SAVING THROWS
From time to time, your character may need to determine 
whether she can avoid or shake off an effect or spell. When 
this happens, the GM will ask you to attempt a Fortitude, 
Reflex, or Will saving throw, depending on the situation. For 
each kind of saving throw, add your character's Fortitude, 
Reflex, or Will proficiency modifier (as appropriate) plus 
the ability modifier associated with that kind of saving 
throw, plus add any modifiers, bonuses, or penalties from 
abilities, feats, or items that always apply, then record this 
number on the line for that saving throw. For Fortitude 
saving throws, use your character's Constitution modifier. 
For Reflex saving throws, use your character's Dexterity 
modifier. For Will saving throws, use your character's 
Wisdom modifier.
18 
ABILITY SCORES
Your character has six ability scores that represent her 
basic attributes and raw potential: Strength, Dexterity, 
Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma. These 
scores each influence different aspects of your character's 
capabilities. As your character progresses through the 
game's story and increases in level, she gains ability boosts 
that improve her ability scores, allowing you to decide 
how her experiences have developed her raw capabilities. 
THE SIX ABILITIES
Your ability scores are split into two main types: physical 
and mental. Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution are 
physical ability scores and measure your character's 
physical power, agility, and stamina. Intelligence, 
Wisdom, and Charisma are mental ability scores and 
measure your character's learned prowess, reasoning, and 
force of personality.
STRENGTH
Strength measures your character's physical power. 
Strength is important if your character plans to engage 
in the hand-to-hand fighting of melee combat. Fighters, 
monks, paladins, and rangers all benefit from having a 
high Strength score. Strength also determines how much 
Bulk your character can carry (see page 175).
DEXTERITY
Dexterity measures your character's agility, balance, and 
reflexes. Dexterity is important if your character plans to 
use stealth to surprise foes or to make attacks with ranged 
weapons. Rogues in particular benefit from having a high 
Dexterity score, as do rangers and some fighters and 
monks. A high Dexterity score allows your character to 
reduce or avoid attacks and magical effects that can be 
dodged or outright evaded, such as dragon's breath.
CONSTITUTION
Constitution measures your character's health and 
stamina. Constitution is an important statistic for all 
characters, especially those who fight in close combat. 
Fighters, monks, paladins, rangers, and rogues particularly 
benefit from a solid Constitution score. Additionally, 
Constitution grants characters extra Hit Points and makes 
them more resistant against poison and disease. 
INTELLIGENCE
Intelligence measures how well your character can learn 
and reason. Intelligence is a vital statistic if your character 
is an alchemist or a wizard, since these classes use 
complicated formulas or spell notations when using their 
abilities. A high Intelligence score allows your character 
to perceive and understand patterns, and to pick up skills 
that can serve her during her adventuring career.
WISDOM
Wisdom measures your character's common sense, 
awareness, and intuition. Wisdom helps you understand 
religion and nature, and is a crucial statistic for clerics 
and druids. A high Wisdom score can help your character 
shake off mental spells and effects. Additionally, Wisdom 
affects your character's Perception modifier, which 
measures how well she observes and identifies threats or 
curiosities among her surroundings. 
CHARISMA
This score measures your character's strength of personality, 
personal magnetism, and ability to influence the thoughts 
and moods of others. Charisma is an important statistic 
for bards and sorcerers, and it grants benefits to clerics 
and paladins. Charisma also determines your character's 
Resonance Points (see page 376).
GENERATING ABILITY SCORES
When you're ready to calculate your character's ability 
scores, follow the steps below. Your character's ability 
scores each start at 10, and then you'll apply the ability 
boosts and flaw she receives from her ancestry, background, 
and class, plus four free ability boosts she receives at 1st 
level. This process allows you to customize your character. 
ABILITY BOOSTS
An ability boost is a one-time increase to a single ability 
score. Typically, an ability boost increases an ability 
score's value by 2. However, if the ability score to which 
you're applying an ability boost is 18 or higher, its value 
increases by only 1. At 1st level, a character can never 
have any ability score that's higher than 18.
When your character receives an ability boost, the rules 
indicate whether it must be applied to a specific ability 
score or one of two scores, or whether it is a "free" ability 
boost that can be applied to any ability score of your 
choice. When you gain multiple ability boosts at the same 
time, you must apply each one to a different score. So, 
for example, if your character is a dwarf, she receives an 
ability boost to her Constitution score, her Wisdom score, 
and one free ability boost, which can be applied to any 
score other than Constitution or Wisdom.
When your character advances to 5th, 10th, 15th, and 
20th levels, she receives ability boosts in four different 
ability scores. These function similarly to the ability 
boosts she receives at 1st level, but she is free to use them 
to increase her ability scores above 18. Keep in mind 
that once an ability score is 18 or higher, an ability boost 
increases the value of that score by only 1.
ABILITY FLAW S
Ability flaws are not nearly as common in Pathfinder as 
are ability boosts. If your character has an ability flaw—likely from her ancestry—it means she decreases that 
ability score by 2 during Step 1 on page 19.
19 
OPTIONAL: VOLUNTARY FLAWS
Sometimes, it's fun to play a character with a major flaw even if 
you're not playing an ancestry that automatically starts with one. 
If you want to reduce any ability scores for your character below 
what they would normally start at, that's fine—playing a brutish 
barbarian with an Intelligence score of 6 or a sickly wizard with 
a Constitution score of 4 could allow for some fun roleplaying 
opportunities—but you don't get any benefit from taking on these 
voluntary flaws. Beware of making your scores so low that your 
character can't keep up with the party!
STEP-BY-STEP INSTRUCTIONS
The following instructions will help you calculate your character's ability scores at 1st level. You'll start with a 
value of 10 in each ability score, then make adjustments for your character's ancestry ability boosts and ability 
flaws. This is followed by adding two ability boosts from her background and four free ability boosts at 1st level. Finally, she will receive one ability boost to her key ability 
score from her class. After determining all of her ability boosts, record the ability scores you've generated on your 
character sheet. For information about modifying your character's ability scores as she gains levels, see Ability 
Boosts on page 18 or the Ability Boosts sections of each class entry in Chapter 3.
STEP 1: START WITH 10
On your character sheet (see pages 429-431) or a piece of scratch paper, write down all six abilities—Strength, 
Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and 
Charisma. Each ability starts with a score of 10. 
Str 10, Dex 10, Con 10, Int 10, Wis 10, Cha 10
STEP 2: ANCESTRY ABILITY BOOSTS AND FLAWS
Now apply the ability boosts that your character's 
ancestry provides. Most ancestries provide ability boosts to two specific ability scores and another free ability boost. (Humans are an exception—they receive two free ability boosts instead.) When you apply these ability boosts, keep in mind that you must apply each one to a different score. Then, apply the ability flaw your character's ancestry 
requires, if any. An ability flaw reduces that ability score 
by 2. You can apply your free ability boost to that score 
to bring your score back to 10. For example, let's say you're making a human 
character, and you want her to be a fighter. Human 
characters receive two free ability boosts, and you 
want to make a fighter who bashes skulls and can take 
a beating. For that, you'll want a good Strength and 
Constitution. Remember that you can't apply multiple 
ability boosts from the same source to a score at a time, 
so you couldn't have a Strength score of 14 quite yet. 
After the ancestry step, your ability scores might look 
like this:Str 12, Dex 10, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 10, Cha 10 
As a second example, if you were making a dwarven fighter, you'd receive ability boosts to Constitution and 
Wisdom, plus one free ability boost, but you'd have an 
ability flaw in Charisma. Your ability scores would start 
out like this:Str 12, Dex 10, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 12, Cha 8
20
STEP 3: TWO BACKGROUND ABILITY BOOSTS
Once you've applied your character's ability boosts and 
ability flaw, if any, from her ancestry, it's time to apply 
her ability boosts from her background. (Descriptions of 
Pathfinder's character backgrounds begin on page 38.) 
The background you choose gives your character two 
ability boosts. Usually, this consists of one free ability 
boost and one ability boost limited to certain choices by 
the background. Let's say you want your human fighter to have been 
a hardworking farmhand in her past. The farmhand 
background says your character gets an ability boost that 
must be applied to either Constitution or Wisdom. You 
want your fighter to be hardy, so you pick Constitution. 
Next, for your character's free ability boost, you decide 
to keep increasing her Strength. Now your ability scores 
are the following: Str 14, Dex 10, Con 14, Int 10, Wis 10, Cha 10 
If you were making the dwarven fighter we mentioned 
earlier into a farmhand, you'd instead have these scores: Str 14, Dex 10, Con 14, Int 10, Wis 12, Cha 8
STEP 4: FOUR FREE ABILITY BOOSTS
After you've chosen your character's ancestry and 
background, you have four free ability boosts you can 
assign to her ability scores as you see fit. These represent 
your character's variety of experiences growing up 
before she became an adventurer. 
Let's take the sample human fighter from above. We 
know you want your fighter to be strong, so you decide 
to spend one of this step's free ability boosts on Strength. 
Dexterity is important for defense, so you put one 
into Dexterity. You want to keep making your fighter 
tough, so you apply an ability boost to Constitution, 
too. Wisdom affects your defense against most mental 
magic, and since a strong, tough fighter is the last person 
you want controlled by some evil wizard, you decide to 
put your last ability boost into Wisdom. After the four 
ability boosts, your ability scores look like this:
Str 16, Dex 12, Con 16, Int 10, Wis 12, Cha 10 
Let's examine how this step might play out for the 
dwarven fighter mentioned above. You decide you'll 
have fun roleplaying an uncharismatic character, 
so you stick with the 8 in Charisma. You apply the 
ability boosts to Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, and 
Wisdom, just like the human fighter. Your ability scores 
now look like this: Str 16, Dex 12, Con 16, Int 10, Wis 14, Cha 8
STEP 5: ONE CLASS ABILITY BOOST
Finally, your choice of your character's class will give 
you one ability boost in a score that's important to your 
class's abilities. This ability score is called your class's 
key ability. Most of the class write-ups in Chapter 3 
indicate a specific score you apply this ability boost to 
when you choose that class, but some let you select from 
one or two choices. Because our sample character is a fighter, you get to 
choose Strength or Dexterity for your character's class 
ability boost. Your character's Dexterity isn't doing 
so hot, and it might be a liability, but you don't want 
to miss out on having a Strength score of 18, so that's 
where you put your final ability boost. If you're really 
worried about your Dexterity, you could go back and 
reassign an ancestry ability boost from Constitution 
to Dexterity, or change your background to one that 
allows Strength or Dexterity as a choice. Assuming you 
stick with your burly character, though, your ability 
scores look like this: Str 18, Dex 12, Con 16, Int 10, Wis 12, Cha 10 
Our dwarf picks Strength, too: Str 18, Dex 12, Con 16, Int 10, Wis 14, Cha 8
STEP 6: RECORD ABILITY SCORES AND MODIFIERS
Once you've determined your ability scores, write 
them down in the appropriate boxes on your character 
sheet. You'll then want to reference Table 1–4: Ability 
Modifiers below to determine the ability modifier 
tied to each of your ability scores. Record this ability 
modifier in the box just to the left of each ability score. 
If you ever need to calculate an ability modifier on 
the fly, it's a fairly easy formula: simply subtract 10 
from the ability score, then divide the result by two 
(rounding down).
TABLE 1–4: ABILITY MODIFIERS
Ability Score
Modifier
1–52–3
–44–5
–36–7
–28–9
–110–11
+012–13
+114–15
+216–17
+318–19
+420–21
+522–23
+624+721
The standard method of generating ability scores described 
earlier in this section works great if you want to create a perfectly 
customized, balanced character. But your GM may decide to inject a 
little randomness into character creation and elect to let dice decide 
what kind of character the players are going to play. In this case, 
you can use this alternative method to generate your ability scores. 
Be warned—the same randomness that makes this system fun also 
allows it to sometimes create characters that are significantly more 
(or less) powerful than the standard ability score system does or 
other Pathfinder rules assume. If your GM opts for rolling ability 
scores, follow these alternative steps.
17s AND 18s
If you reach a 17 or 18 in an ability score, you're still limited to the cap 
of 18 in any ability score at level 1. This might mean a step will require 
you to put an ability boost into an ability that would raise it above the 
cap. When this happens, you can put the ability boost into another 
score instead, or you can put it into a 17 and lose the excess increase.
For instance, if you rolled a 17 for Constitution and were creating a 
dwarf, you could apply your dwarf's racial Constitution ability boost 
to your Strength of 14 instead. You could still apply it to Constitution 
anyway, making it an 18, but you'd lose the long-term benefits you 
would have gained if you'd applied it to a lower score.
STEP-BY-STEP INSTRUCTIONS
STEP 1: ROLL BASE ABILITY SCORES
Roll four six-sided dice (4d6) and discard the lowest die result. Add the three remaining results together and record the sum on a 
piece of scratch paper. Repeat this process until you've generated six such values.
STEP 2: ASSIGN VALUES TO ABILITY SCORES
Pick which of these values will become each of your ability scores. For example, let's again assume you are creating a fighter that's 
both strong and tough, and you have received the following values from rolling:
17, 14, 13, 11, 9, 9
You assign them to your ability scores as follows. At this stage, the human and dwarven fighters would have the same scores.
Str 17, Dex 13, Con 14, Int 9, Wis 11, Cha 9
STEP 3: APPLY ANCESTRY ABILITY BOOSTS AND FLAWS
Next you apply the ability boosts your character gains from her ancestry, but she receives one fewer free ability boost than normal. 
If your character's ancestry has any ability flaws, you apply those at this point, as well. Our human fighter would have only one free 
ability boost using this method. After putting the ability boost into Dexterity, your ability scores would look like this:
Str 17, Dex 15, Con 14, Int 9, Wis 11, Cha 9 
Our dwarf would get two ability boosts (instead of three), which must go into Constitution and Wisdom. She does not receive a 
free ability boost, but she must still reduce her Charisma by 2 because of her ability flaw. The adjusted scores would be as follows:
Str 17, Dex 13, Con 16, Int 9, Wis 13, Cha 7
STEP 4: APPLY BACKGROUND ABILITY BOOST
With the rolling method of ability score generation, your character loses the free ability boost from her background. You can still 
boost your human farmhand's Constitution or Wisdom score. Selecting Constitution, the human farmhand would have these scores:
Str 17, Dex 15, Con 16, Int 9, Wis 11, Cha 9
The dwarven farmhand would have these scores:
Str 17, Dex 13, Con 18, Int 9, Wis 13, Cha 7
STEP 5: RECORD ABILITY SCORES
In the rolling method, you don't get free ability boosts or an ability boost from your class. Write down your scores and modifiers, just 
as you would if you had used the standard method of generating ability scores described earlier in this section.
OPTIONAL: ROLLING ABILITY SCORES
22
The player character ancestries presented in this book are dwarves, elves, gnomes, goblins, halflings, and humans (including the half-human groups of half-elves and half-orcs). These ancestries are each detailed on the following pages of this chapter. 
Your character also has a background that represents 
the training or environments she experienced as a youth. 
This could include time spent working as an acrobat, 
a barkeep, or a farmhand, or an upbringing like that 
of a noble, a nomad, or a scholar. Your character's 
background affords her extra ability boosts as well as 
other benefits, such as a feat and training in one Lore 
skill. The list of character backgrounds begins on 
page 38 in this chapter.  
A character has one ancestry and one background, both 
of which you select during character creation. Once chosen, 
your ancestry and background can't be changed.
READING ANCESTRY ENTRIES
The details of each ancestry are provided on the following 
pages. Each entry begins with an overview of the ancestry, 
examining its culture and place in the world. This is 
followed by rules elements you need to know to build a 
character of that ancestry, including ability boosts and 
ability flaws, Hit Points, size, Speed, languages, and other 
special rules. The entries then list the ancestry feats you 
can select as your character increases in level. Each ancestry detailed in this chapter follows the format 
described below. 
OVERVIEW
Each entry begins with a brief introduction to the ancestry, 
examining its place on Golarion. This is followed by a section 
that provides the broad physical characteristics associated 
with an ancestry's members and background information 
about the ancestry's culture as a whole. This section also gives 
you a sense of the ancestry's history on Golarion, providing 
insight to personality types or viewpoints that are common 
among members of that ancestry. Of course, you can always 
play a character whose personality and motivations run far 
afield of typical members of her ancestry.
RULES
This section includes all of the mechanical details you 
need to play a character of a given ancestry.
Hit Points
This tells you how many Hit Points your character gains from her ancestry at 1st level. When you determine your starting Hit Points, you will add your character's 
Constitution modifier and the Hit Points provided by her class to this number. For more information about 
calculating Hit Points, see Apply Your Class on page 14.
Size
This tells you the physical size of members of your 
character's ancestry. Most ancestries are Medium, which 
corresponds roughly to the height and weight range of a 
human adult. Some ancestries are Small, which corresponds 
to a height and weight range roughly half that of a Medium 
creature. For more information about size, see page 313.
Speed
This entry designates how far a member of your character's ancestry can move each time she spends an 
action (such as Stride) to do so. Many ancestries' Speed is 25 feet, though some are slower or faster.
Ability Boosts
This lists the ability scores to which you apply ability boosts when creating a character of this ancestry. Most 
ancestries provide ability boosts to two speciflc ability scores, plus a free ability boost that you can apply to any other ability score of your choice. For more about ability boosts and applying them during 
character creation, see page 18.
Ability Flaw
This lists the ability score to which you apply an ability flaw 
when creating a character of this ancestry. Most ancestries, 
with the exception of humans, include an ability flaw.
For more about ability flaws and applying them during character creation, see page 18.
Your character's heritage determines which of the world's many peoples she calls her own, 
whether it's diverse humans, insular but vivacious elves, traditionalist and family-focused 
dwarves, or any of the other groups of people that call Golarion home. Both her heritage 
and her experiences as a youth might be key parts of her identity, and they likely shape 
how she sees the world and her place in it.
ANCESTRIES AND BACKGROUNDS
23 
Languages and Bonus Languages
This tells you the languages that members of your character's 
ancestry speak at 1st level, as well as a list of additional 
languages common among members of that ancestry. If 
your character's Intelligence score is 14 or higher at 1st 
level, you can select one of the bonus languages from this 
list for your character to speak in addition to her ancestry 
language or languages. Additionally, your character might 
use sign language. More information about languages, 
including sign language, can be found on page 40.
Traits
This lists the mechanical indicators, called traits, that apply to all members of your character's ancestry. Traits 
your character gains through her ancestry often don't 
convey any mechanical benefit, but they are important for 
determining how certain spells, effects, and other aspects 
of the game interact with your character. For more about 
traits, see page 414.
Special Abilities
This section presents the abilities, characteristics, senses, and other unique qualities that members of each ancestry manifest. Some ancestries do not have any special rules, in which case this section is absent. 
ANCESTRY FEATS
This section presents ancestry feats, which allow you to 
customize your character. You gain your first ancestry feat 
at 1st level, and another at 5th level, 9th level, 13th level, 
and 17th level, as indicated in the class advancement table 
in the descriptions of each class (see page 42). 
PLAYING HALF-ELVES AND HALF-ORCS
Playing a half-elf or a half-orc requires building your character as a human and then, at 1st level, selecting the Half-Elf 
ancestry feat or the Half-Orc ancestry feat, as appropriate. This ancestry feat grants you access to elf and half-elf or 
orc and half-orc ancestry feats, respectively, in addition to human ancestry feats.
Some of the feats in this section are marked with 
symbols that denote how you can use them during play. 
Full rules for actions, activities, free actions, and reactions 
can be found on page 296.
Ancestry feats list a number on the same line as the 
feat's name, indicating the minimum level your character 
must be to select the feat. In most cases, ancestry feats 
are labeled with "Feat 1," meaning that your character 
can select the feat at 1st level or anytime you gain an 
ancestry feat thereafter. Ancestry feats also sometimes 
list prerequisites—these are additional requirements 
that your character must fulflll before she can select 
that feat. 
All ancestry feats have a trait that indicates which 
ancestry they belong to. 
Heritage Feats
Ancestry feats that have the heritage trait are feats that 
your character can select only at 1st level. Unlike with 
other feats, you cannot retrain your character to learn a 
heritage feat or exchange a heritage feat for one that was 
selected at 1st level. Your character can never have more 
than one heritage feat. 
ADVENTURERS
This section includes some suggested backgrounds and 
classes that are popular among members of each ancestry. 
Cultural proclivities and inherent abilities inform these 
common choices, but they certainly don't define them, 
nor do all members of any given ancestry adhere to any 
of these norms. Ultimately, you should create a character 
from a concept that excites you!
24 
Dwarf
ABILITY BOOSTS
Constitution
Wisdom
Free
ABILITY FLAW 
Charisma

LANGUAGES
Common 
Dwarf

BONUS LANGUAGES
At 1st level, if your Intelligence score is 
14 or higher, you can also select one of 
the following languages: Giant, Gnome, 
Goblin, Orc, Terran, or Undercommon.
TRAITS
Dwarf

Humanoid

DARKVISION

You can see in darkness and dim light 
just as well as you can see in bright light, 
though your vision in darkness is in black 
and white. 
UNBURDENED
If your Speed would be reduced by armor 
you wear or the encumbered condition, 
you ignore 5 feet of that reduction.
OVERVIEW
The dwarves' ancient surface empire 
fell long ago, overwhelmed by orc 
and goblinoid enemies, but dwarves 
today retain many of the qualities that 
propelled their people to greatness in ancient 
times: fierceness, gumption, and stubbornness in 
endeavors ranging from battle and craftsmanship to 
forging ties with family and friends. Dwarves are slow to 
trust people who are not their kin—a tendency that traces to their history of 
bloody conflict with foes such as giants, orcs, and the horrors of the deeps. 
Trust from a dwarf is hard won, but as strong as iron. 
These sturdy people stand about a foot shorter than most humans. Long hair 
is often a source of pride among them, particularly when braided into intricate 
patterns. Men are typically broader than women, and many men take pride in 
their long beards. Dwarves typically reach physical adulthood around the age 
of 25 and can live to around 350 years old. The distance between dwarven mountain citadels creates vast cultural divides, but many dwarves share a common passion for architecture, gem cutting, metalwork, mining, and stonework. Dwarves revere honor, justice, and the traditions of their clans and kingdoms. Few dwarves are seen without a clan dagger, a weapon forged just before an individual dwarf's birth and 
bearing the gemstone of the clan. Torag, the god of dwarvenkind, is a favored 
dwarven deity.
Dwarven lore tells epic tales of the short, stocky people's long-ago pilgrimage from their 
Darklands home to the surface—a journey they undertook at the behest of a prophet of the 
god of dwarvenkind. The people reached their destination and built magnificent fortifications 
they came to call Sky Citadels, and many dwarves remain ensconced within these and other 
ancestral homes to this day. Given the dwarves' harrowing history, their reputation as a stoic 
and stern people is well earned.
HIT POINTS 10 | SIZE Medium | SPEED 20 feet
DWARF
25 
DWARVEN ADVENTURERS
Some backgrounds are particularly suitable for dwarves. You 
might consider the acolyte background if you have religious 
leanings, the nomad background if you've traveled far from 
home, or the warrior background if you were raised to defend a 
dwarven community. The barkeep, blacksmith, farmhand, and 
merchant backgrounds also speak to the dwarven way of life.
Dwarves excel at many of the martial classes, such as 
barbarian, fighter, monk, and ranger, but they also make 
excellent clerics and druids. 
ANCESTRY FEATS
At 1st level, you gain one ancestry feat, and you gain an 
additional ancestry feat every 4 levels thereafter (at 5th, 9th, 
13th, and 17th levels). As a dwarf, you select from among 
the following ancestry feats. 
ANCESTRAL HATRED FEAT 1
 You have shaped your hatred of ancestral dwarven 
foes into a powerful weapon. Choose two of the following creature 
traits: derro, duergar, giant, or orc. You gain a +1 circumstance bonus 
to damage rolls against creatures with one of the chosen traits. If a 
creature with a chosen trait critically succeeds at an attack against 
you, this bonus increases to +4 against that creature for 1 minute.
Special Your GM can add appropriate creature traits to this 
list if your character is from a community that commonly fights 
other types of enemies. 
ANCIENT'S BLOOD FEAT 1
 Trigger
 You attempt a saving throw against a 
magical Effect. Your ancestors' innate resistance to magic has manifested in you. 
You gain a +2 circumstance bonus to the triggering saving throw.
Special Your resistance hampers your connection to magic items. 
Reduce your total Resonance Points by 2 (minimum 0). For more 
information about Resonance Points, see page 376.
BOULDER ROLL FEAT 5
 Prerequisites
 Mountain Roots (see below)
Your dwarven build allows you to push foes around. Take a Step 
into the square of a foe that is your size or smaller, and the foe 
must move into the empty space directly behind it. The foe must 
move even if doing so places it in harm's way. The foe can attempt 
to block your Step by rolling a Fortitude saving throw against your 
Athletics DC. If the foe attempts this saving throw, regardless of 
the saving throw's result, the creature takes bludgeoning damage 
equal to your level plus your Strength modifier.
If the foe can't move into an empty space (if it is surrounded 
by solid objects or other creatures, for example), your Boulder 
Roll has no Effect.
GIANT BANE FEAT 1
 Your squat stature and your hatred for giantkind 
give you an edge when fighting them. You gain a +1 circumstance 
bonus to your Armor Class against giants; Fortitude and Reflex 
DCs against giants' attempts to Disarm, Grapple, Shove, or Trip 
you; Survival checks to track giants; Perception checks to notice 
giants; and Stealth checks to avoid being noticed by giants.
HARDY FEAT 1 
Your blood runs hearty and strong, and you can 
shake off toxins that would lay others low. You 
gain poison resistance equal to half your level (minimum 1), and 
each of your successful saving throws against an ongoing poison 
reduces its stage by 2, or 1 for a virulent poison. Each critical 
success against an ongoing poison reduces its stage by 3, or 2 
for a virulent poison. 
MOUNTAIN ROOTS FEAT 1 
You can plant your feet on the ground to become 
nearly immovable. You gain a +2 circumstance bonus to your 
Fortitude or Reflex DC whenever anyone attempts to Shove or 
Trip you. This bonus also applies to saves against spells or Effects 
that attempt to knock you prone. In addition, if any ability or 
Effect would force you to move 10 feet or more in any direction, 
you are moved only half the distance.
ROCK RUNNER FEAT 1
 Your innate connection to stone makes you 
adept at moving across uneven surfaces. When you take the 
Step action, you can ignore difficult terrain caused by uneven 
ground made of stone and earth. In addition, when you use the 
Acrobatics skill to Balance (see page 144) on narrow surfaces 
or uneven ground made of stone or earth, you aren't flat-footed, 
and you treat a success on the Acrobatics check as if it were a 
critical success. STONECUNNING FEAT 1
 You have a knack for noticing inconsistencies and 
craftsmanship techniques in the stonework around you. You gain 
a +2 circumstance bonus to Perception checks to notice unusual 
stonework. This bonus applies to checks to discover mechanical 
traps made of stone or hidden inside of stone. If you aren't using the Seek action (see page 308) or searching, 
the GM rolls a secret check without the bonus and with a –2 
circumstance penalty for you to notice unusual stonework 
anyway (in such cases, this feat takes on the secret trait).
WEAPON CUNNING [DWARF] FEAT 5
 Prerequisites
 Weapon Familiarity (Dwarf)
Whenever you critically hit using a weapon of the axe, hammer, 
or pick group, you apply the weapon's critical specialization Effect. 
WEAPON FAMILIARITY [DWARF] FEAT 1
 Your kin have instilled in you an affinity for hard-
hitting weapons, and you prefer them to more elegant arms. You 
are trained with the battleaxe, pick, and warhammer.
In addition, you gain access to all uncommon dwarf weapons. 
For the purpose of proficiencies, you treat martial dwarf weapons 
as simple weapons and exotic dwarf weapons as martial weapons. 
More about weapons can be found on page 178.
Dwarf
Dwarf
Dwarf
Dwarf
Dwarf
26 ABILITY BOOSTS
Dexterity
Intelligence Free
ABILITY FLAW Constitution
LANGUAGES
Common Elven

BONUS LANGUAGES
At 1st level, if your Intelligence score is 14 
or higher, you can also select one of the 
following languages: Celestial, Draconic, 
Gnoll, Gnomish, Goblin, Orcish, or Sylvan.
TRAITS
Elf
Humanoid
LOW-LIGHT VISIONYou can see in dim light as though it were 
bright light. OVERVIEW
Elves combine an otherworldly grace, sharp intellect, and mysterious charm in a way that is practically magnetic to members of other ancestries. They are often voraciously intellectual, though they flll their long years with complicated pedagogies that most shorter-lived peoples find inefflcient. Elves 
also hold notoriously long grudges against their rivals, but these antagonistic relationships can sometimes blossom into friendship over time. Elves are generally taller than humans, and they have a fragile grace 
accentuated with long facial features and sharply pointed ears. Broad pupils flll 
their wide eyes, giving elves an alien look and allowing them to see sharply even 
in very little light. Elves typically reach physical adulthood around the age of 
20 (though they're considered by other elves to be fully emotionally mature at 
close to the end of their first century), and they can live to around 600 years old. 
Elves subtly and deeply attune to their environment and their companions, 
and they often take on physical traits reflecting their surroundings. An elf 
who has dwelled in primeval forests for centuries, for example, might exhibit 
verdant hair and gnarled flngers, while one who's lived in a desert might have 
golden pupils and skin. Elves are often emotional and capricious, yet they also value kindness and 
beauty. They prefer deities who share their love of all things mystic and artistic—
Desna and Shelyn are particular favorites. Calistria is the most notorious of 
elven deities, as she represents many of the elven ideals taken to the extreme. Elven culture is deep, rich, and on the decline. Their society peaked millennia ago, long 
before they fled Golarion to escape the calamity of Earthfall. Returning to a changed 
land, the elves have struggled to reclaim their ancestral homes, most notably from the 
terrible demons that have invaded parts of their homeland. Remnants of great elven 
settlements lie scattered across the Inner Sea region, and even their ancestral lands contain 
long-forgotten ruins and artifacts alongside newer structures.
HIT POINTS 6 | SIZE Medium | SPEED 30 feet
ELF
27 
ELVEN ADVENTURERS
Some background options are particularly suitable for 
elves. Look to the hunter background if you were raised 
in the wilderness, the noble background if you grew up in 
the court, or the scholar background if you pursued a life 
in academia. In addition, the acrobat, entertainer, and scout 
backgrounds all make good fits for an elf. 
When selecting a class, consider selecting ranger or 
rogue, both of which take advantage of elves' inherently 
dexterous nature. You might also consider being an 
alchemist or wizard, both of which speak to elves' natural 
intellectual curiosity. 
ANCESTRY FEATS
At 1st level, you gain one ancestry feat, and you gain an 
additional ancestry feat every 4 levels thereafter (at 5th, 9th, 
13th, and 17th levels). As an elf, you select from among the 
following ancestry feats. 
AGELESS PATIENCE FEAT 1 
You move at a pace born from longevity that 
might infuriate your shorter-lived comrades but enhances your 
thoroughness. You can spend twice as much downtime as usual 
on a downtime activity to receive a +2 circumstance bonus to 
all checks related to that downtime activity. For more about 
downtime, see page 318.
ANCESTRAL LONGEVITY FEAT 1 
You have accumulated a vast array of lived 
knowledge over your long life. During your daily preparations 
(see page 317), you can reflect upon your life experiences to 
become trained in one skill of your choice. This proficiency lasts 
until you prepare again. More about skills and proficiency can be 
found on page 142.
DEMON SKIRMISHER FEAT 1 
You have served in the fight to reclaim your 
homeland from demons, and thus you have learned to mitigate 
those fiends' strengths and amplify their weaknesses. Your 
attacks treat demons' resistances as if they were 1 lower and 
demons' weaknesses as if they were 1 higher. If you use the 
Stride action on your turn, you instead treat demons' resistances 
as 2 lower and their weaknesses as 2 higher until the end of 
your turn.
FORLORN FEAT 1 
Watching your friends age and die fills you with 
moroseness that girds you against harmful emotions. You gain 
a +1 circumstance bonus to saves against emotion Effects. If you 
succeed at a saving throw against an emotion Effect, treat it as a 
critical success instead. 
KEEN HEARING FEAT 1 
Your ears are finely tuned to even the slightest 
whispers of sound. As long as you can hear 
normally, you can use the Seek action to sense unseen creatures 
in a 60-foot cone instead of a 30-foot cone. You also gain a 
+2 circumstance bonus to sense unseen creatures within 30 feet 
that you can hear with a Seek action. 
NIMBLE FEAT 1 
Your reflexes and lithe muscles are tightly honed. 
Your Speed increases by 5 feet. Additionally, when you use the 
Stride action, you can ignore difficult terrain in one square during 
that move.
OTHERWORLDLY MAGIC FEAT 1 
Choose one cantrip from the arcane spell list (see 
page 199). You can cast this cantrip as an innate arcane spell at
 will. The cantrip is heightened to a spell level equal to half your 
level rounded up. You can learn more about spells on page
 192.
UNWAVERING MIEN FEAT 1 
Your mystic control and meditation allow you to 
resist external influences upon your consciousness. When you 
would be confused, frightened, or stupefied for at least 2 rounds, 
reduce the duration by 1 round.
You still require natural sleep, but you are immune to Effects 
that would cause you to fall asleep. This protects only against the 
asleep condition, not against other forms of falling unconscious. 
WEAPON ELEGANCE [ELF] FEAT 5 
Prerequisites
 Weapon Familiarity (Elf)
You are attuned to the weapons of your elf ancestors and are 
particularly deadly when using them. Whenever you critically 
hit using a weapon of the bow or sword group, you apply the 
weapon's critical specialization Effect.
WEAPON FAMILIARITY [ELF] FEAT 1 
You favor bows and elegant weapons. You are 
trained with longbows, composite longbows, longswords, 
rapiers, shortbows, and composite shortbows.
In addition, you gain access to all uncommon elf weapons. 
For the purpose of proficiencies, you treat martial elf weapons 
as simple weapons and exotic elf weapons as martial weapons. 
More about weapons can be found on page 178.
OVERVIEW
Always hungry for new experiences, 
gnomes constantly wander both 
mentally and physically, attempting 
to stave off a terrible ailment that 
threatens all of their people. This affliction—the Bleaching—strikes gnomes 
who fail to dream, innovate, and take in new experiences as their progenitors 
did every hour of every day in the First World. The Bleaching slowly drains 
the literal color from gnomes, and it plunges the affected into states of 
deep depression that eventually claim their lives. Only a very few gnomes 
survive this scourge, becoming deeply morose and wise survivors known 
as bleachlings. Most gnomes stand just over 3 feet tall and weigh little more than a young 
human child. Gnomes reach physical adulthood around the age of 18, though 
many retain a childlike curiosity even into adulthood. Gnomes rarely live 
longer than 400 years. 
Though they all trace their ancestry to the First World, gnomes otherwise 
have little culture they point to as their own. Instead, gnomes tend to pick 
and choose cultural practices of the region in which they live. Gnomes claim 
no nation in its entirety, and as a people they wouldn't know what to do with 
such a state if one existed. Most gnomes consider adventure not a choice but a 
necessity, and gnome adventurers often collect mementos during their travels 
that allow them to relive their most exciting stories. Gnomes eschew order, and therefore most worship deities who value 
individuality and nature, such as Cayden Cailean, Desna, Gozreh, and Shelyn. 
ABILITY BOOSTS
Constitution
Charisma
 Free
ABILITY FLAW 
Strength

LANGUAGES
Common Gnomish Sylvan

BONUS LANGUAGES
At 1st level, if your Intelligence score 
is 14 or higher, you can also select one 
of the following languages: Draconic, 
Dwarven, Elven, Goblin, Jotun, or Orcish.
TRAITS
Gnome 
Humanoid

LOW-LIGHT VISION
You can see in dim light as though it 
were bright light.
Long ago, early gnome ancestors migrated from the First World, realm of the fey. 
While it's unclear why the first gnomes wandered to Golarion, their origin manifests 
in modern gnomes' bizarre reasoning, eccentricity, obsessive tendencies, and what some 
see as naivete. These qualities are further reflected in their physical characteristics, such 
as spindly limbs, brightly colored hair, and childlike and extremely expressive facial 
features that further reflect their otherworldly origins.
HIT POINTS 8 | SIZE Small | SPEED 20 feet
GNOME
29 
GNOME ADVENTURERS
Some background options make particularly good choices 
for gnomes. Consider the entertainer background if you 
grew up in front of a crowd, the merchant background if you 
were raised in a family business, or the nomad background 
if you traveled from place to place with your kin. In addition, 
the animal whisperer, barkeep, and farmhand backgrounds 
are all applicable to the gnome lifestyle.
When deciding on a class, note that gnomes' connection 
to the natural world makes them suitable rangers or druids. 
While gnomes are not often physically strong, they are often 
gifted with magic, especially magic that originates from the 
First World, making them excellent bards and sorcerers.
ANCESTRY FEATS
At 1st level, you gain one ancestry feat, and you gain an 
additional ancestry feat every 4 levels thereafter (at 5th, 9th, 
13th, and 17th level). As a gnome, you select from among 
the following ancestry feats. 
ANIMAL ACCOMPLICE FEAT 1 
A rapport develops between you and an animal, 
which becomes magically bonded to you. You gain a familiar (see 
page 287). The type of animal is up to you, but most gnomes 
choose animals with a burrow Speed. 
ANIMAL SPEAKER FEAT 1
 You recognize the chittering of ground creatures 
as a language of its own. You can ask questions of, receive 
answers from, and use the Diplomacy skill with animals that 
have a burrow Speed, such as badgers, ground squirrels, moles, 
and prairie dogs. The GM determines which animals count for this ability.
ANIMAL WHISPERER FEAT 5
 Prerequisites
 Animal Speaker
 You hear the sounds of animals as conversations instead of 
unintelligent noise. You can speak to all animals, not just animals 
with a burrow Speed. You gain a +1 circumstance bonus on 
Diplomacy checks to Make an Impression on animals. 
DISCERNING SMELL FEAT 1
 You can smell and taste all sorts of exotic flavors 
that are too nuanced for a human palate. You gain a 
+2 circumstance bonus to sense an unseen creature that is close 
enough for you to smell (typically within 30 feet, though halve 
the distance if you are upwind and double the distance if you are 
downwind). For more information about senses, see page 301.
FEY FELLOWSHIP FEAT 1 
Your fey origins afford you a warmer reception 
from creatures of the First World as well as tools to foil their 
tricks. Against fey creatures, you gain a +1 circumstance bonus 
to Diplomacy checks, Perception checks, and saving throws. 
FIRST WORLD MAGIC FEAT 1
 Choose one cantrip from the primal spell list (see 
page 201). You can cast this spell as an innate primal spell at will. 
The cantrip is heightened to a spell level equal to half your level 
rounded up. For more information about spells, see page 192.
ILLUSION SENSE FEAT 1
 Your ancestors spent their days cloaked and 
cradled in illusions, and sensing this magic is second nature to 
you. You gain a +1 circumstance bonus to Perception checks 
and Will saves against illusions. When you come within 10 feet 
of an illusion that can be disbelieved, you can attempt a single 
Perception check to disbelieve it, even without spending an 
action to interact with it in some way. For more about disbelieving 
illusions, see page 194.
OBSESSIVE FEAT 1
 You might have a flighty nature, but when a topic 
captures your attention, you dive into it headfirst. Pick a category 
of the Lore skill. You are trained in that skill. At 2nd
 level you become an expert, at 7th level you become a master, and at 15th 
level you become legendary.
WEAPON FAMILIARITY [GNOME] FEAT 1
 You favor unusual weapons tied to your people, 
such as blades with curved and unusual shapes. You are trained 
with glaives and kukris.
In addition, you gain access to all uncommon gnome weapons. 
For the purpose of proficiencies, you treat martial gnome 
weapons as simple weapons and exotic gnome weapons as 
martial weapons. For more information about weapons, see 
page 178.
WEAPON INNOVATOR [GNOME] FEAT 5
 Prerequisites
 Weapon Familiarity (Gnome)
You produce outstanding results when wielding unusual weapons. 
Whenever you critically hit using a glaive, kukri, or gnome 
weapon, you apply the weapon's critical specialization Effect.

OVERVIEW
Even those goblins who break from their destructive past often subtly perpetuate 
some of the qualities that have been tied to the creatures for millennia. Goblins 
tend to flock to strong leaders, fiercely protecting those companions who have protected them from physical harm or offered a sympathetic ear when they learn of the goblins' woes. Some goblins remain deeply fascinated with fire, or fearlessly devour a meal that might turn others' stomachs. Others are endless tinkerers and view their companions' trash simply as components of gadgets yet to be made. Occasionally, fellow adventurers find these proclivities 
unsettling or odd, but more often than not, goblins' friends consider these qualities endearing. Though goblins' culture has splintered radically, their reputation across the 
Inner Sea region has changed little. As such, goblins who travel to larger cities 
are frequently subjected to derision, and as a result many goblins work twice 
as hard at proving their worth. Those who befriend a goblin quickly learn that 
while a goblin's friendship might include all manners of pranks, such fun comes 
from a place of true acceptance—something that a goblin does not give freely.
Goblins reach adolescence by the age of 3 and adulthood 4 or 5 years later. In 
theory, goblins could live 50 years or more, but without anyone to protect them 
from each other or themselves, few live past 20 years of age. Goblins typically 
stand about 3 feet tall, with skin colors that range from green to gray to blue. 
Goblin adventurers typically worship Cayden Cailean. 
ABILITY BOOSTS
Dexterity
Charisma
 Free
ABILITY FLAW 
Wisdom
LANGUAGES
Common Goblin
BONUS LANGUAGES
At 1st level, if your Intelligence score is 14 
or higher, you can also select one of the 
following languages: Draconic, Dwarven, 
Gnoll, Gnomish, Halfling, or Orcish.
TRAITS
Goblin
Humanoid
DARKVISION
You can see in darkness and dim light 
just as well as you can see in bright light, 
though your vision in darkness is in black 
and white. It's been almost 20 years since the end of the Goblinblood Wars that scorched the 
Chitterwood, forcing dozens of tribes into hiding. Now with new threats rising up, the 
many tribal elders have put aside their reckless ways in the hope of forging alliances that 
give them a chance at survival.  While many have stayed to protect their homelands, others 
have become refugees, with some traveling to Absalom in search of a home that might 
offer them sanctuary in a world that does not trust them. 
HIT POINTS 6 | SIZE Small | SPEED 25 feet
31 
GOBLIN ADVENTURERS
Some backgrounds make particularly good choices for 
goblins. Consider the criminal background if you came from 
a lawless tribe, the entertainer background if you made 
a living performing for an audience, or the street urchin 
background if you were raised in poverty. In addition, the 
acrobat, gladiator, and hunter backgrounds also make sense 
for a goblin. When it is time to select a class, consider playing an 
alchemist, since many goblins love fire, or a bard, since many 
goblins love songs. As scrappy survivors, goblins are often 
rogues who dart about the shadows, though their natural 
charismatic nature also draws them to the pursuit of magical 
classes such as sorcerer.
ANCESTRY FEATS
At 1st level, you gain one ancestry feat, and you gain an 
additional ancestry feat every 4 levels thereafter (at 5th, 9th, 
13th, and 17th level). As a goblin, you choose from among 
the following ancestry feats. 
BURN IT FEAT 1
 Fire fascinates you. Your spells and alchemical 
items that deal fire damage gain a conditional bonus to damage 
equal to half the spell's level or the item's level (minimum 1). You 
also gain a +1 conditional bonus to any persistent fire damage 
you deal, whether it's from a spell or not.
CITY SCAVENGER FEAT 1
 You know that the greatest treasures often look 
like refuse, and you scoff at those who throw away perfectly 
good scraps. You can attempt a Survival check to search for food 
and supplies and to subsist in a city as well as in the wild. When 
you do, you gain a +1 circumstance bonus to your Survival check. 
EAT ANYTHING FEAT 1
 You are comfortable subsisting on food that most 
folks would consider spoiled. You gain a +2
 circumstance bonus 
to saving throws against toxins and against gaining the sick 
condition, but only if it resulted from something you ate. You can 
eat and drink things when you have the sick condition.
FLAME HEART FEAT 1
 As a result of either a childhood accident with 
flames or an ongoing fascination with fire, your skin 
has thickened, protecting you against burning. You gain resistance 
to fire equal to half your level (minimum 1), and your flat check to 
remove persistent fire damage (see page 323) is DC 15 instead of 
DC 20 without requiring an action to reduce the DC. 
JUNK TINKER FEAT 1
 You can make useful tools out of even the most 
twisted or rusted scraps. You can craft ordinary items, including 
weapons but not armor, out of junk. This costs one-quarter the 
usual amount for a standard-quality item but always results in 
an item of poor quality. You take only a –1 item penalty when 
using poor-quality items you crafted. For more information about 
crafting items, see page 147.
RAZOR TEETH FEAT 1
 Your teeth are formidable weapons. You gain a jaws 
unarmed attack that deals 1d6 piercing damage. 
For more information about unarmed attacks, see page 178.
ROUGH RIDER FEAT 1
 Any creature that will bear your weight can 
become your loyal steed, and you know how to coax even the 
strangest beasts into service. You gain the Ride feat, even if you 
don't meet the prerequisites. You gain a +1 circumstance bonus 
to Nature checks to Handle a goblin dog or wolf mount. For more 
about the Nature skill, see page 152.
VERY SNEAKY FEAT 1
 Taller folk rarely pay attention to the shadows at 
their feet, and you take full advantage of this. You can move 5 
feet farther when you take the Sneak action, up to your Speed 
(see page 158). In addition, if you critically succeed at a Stealth check against 
a creature and then attack that creature, your target remains 
flat-footed during your attack. The GM doesn't reveal that your 
Stealth check resulted in a critical success until you declare 
your attack. 
WEAPON FAMILIARITY [GOBLIN] FEAT 1
 Others might look upon them with disdain, but you 
know that the weapons of your people are as effective as they 
are sharp. You are trained with the dogslicer and horsechopper.
In addition, you gain access to all uncommon goblin weapons. 
For the purpose of proficiencies, you treat martial goblin weapons 
as simple weapons and exotic goblin weapons as martial 
weapons. For more information about weapons, see page 178.
WEAPON FRENZY [GOBLIN] FEAT 5
 Prerequisites
 Weapon Familiarity (Goblin)
You can wield your people's weapons of choice as well as any 
elf brandishes a longsword or dwarf swings a warhammer. 
Whenever you critically hit using a goblin weapon, you apply the 
weapon's critical specialization Effect.

OVERVIEW
Many taller people dismiss 
halflings due to their size or, 
worse still, treat them like children. 
Halflings use these misconceptions and prejudices 
to their advantage, gaining access to opportunities and 
performing deeds of daring mischief or heroism. A halfling's curiosity is 
tempered with caution, often leading to narrow escapes. Despite their jovial and friendly nature, halflings don't naturally tend to 
congregate together. They have no cultural homeland, and they instead weave 
themselves throughout the world's societies. Halflings usually dwell among 
humans within the walls of cities, eking out whatever livings they can, many 
performing menial labor or simple service jobs. Some halflings reject such a 
life, instead turning to the open road, traveling from place to place in search of 
fortune and fame. These nomadic halflings often travel in small groups, sharing 
hardships and simple pleasures among close friends and family.
Halflings rarely grow to more than 3 feet in height. Tufts of hair warm the 
tops of their broad, tanned feet, and they prefer to walk barefoot. Halflings 
typically reach physical adulthood at the age of 20. A typical halfling can live 
to around 150 years old. Halflings are loyal to their friends and family, but they 
are not afraid to do what needs to be done in order to survive. Halflings favor 
gods that either grant luck, such as Desna, or encourage guile, like Norgorber, 
and many appreciate Cayden Cailean's role as a liberator.
Halflings' wanderlust and opportunism make them ideal adventurers, and 
one popular superstition even claims that traveling with a halfling is good luck. 
ABILITY BOOSTS
Dexterity
Wisdom Free
ABILITY FLAW Strength

LANGUAGES
Common Halfling
BONUS LANGUAGES
At 1st level, if your Intelligence score 
is 14 or higher, you can also select one 
of the following languages: Dwarven, 
Elven, Gnomish, or Goblin.
TRAITS
Halfling
Humanoid
Claiming no place as their own, halflings control few settlements larger than villages. Instead, 
they frequently live among humans within the walls of larger cities, carving out small 
communities alongside other tall-folk. Many halflings lead perfectly fulfilling lives in the 
shadows of their larger neighbors, while others prefer a nomadic existence, traveling the world 
and taking advantage of opportunities and adventures as they come. 
HIT POINTS 6 | SIZE Small | SPEED 25 feet
HALFLING
33 
HALFLING ADVENTURERS
Some backgrounds make particularly good choices for 
halflings. You might consider the acrobat background if 
you were raised in a troupe, the entertainer background if 
you had to perform to pay for a meal, or the street urchin 
background if you grew up in poverty. In addition, the 
barkeep, criminal, and laborer
 backgrounds all make good 
fits for halflings. When choosing a class, note that halflings make great 
clerics and rogues due to their natural proclivities, but many 
also become skilled monks or rangers. 
ANCESTRY FEATS
At 1st level, you gain one ancestry feat, and you gain an 
additional ancestry feat every 4 levels thereafter (at 5th, 
9th, 13th, and 17th level). As a halfling, you choose from 
among the following ancestry feats. 
ATTENTIVE FEAT 1
 Your communal lifestyle causes you to notice when 
those around you act out of character. You gain a +2 circumstance 
bonus to Perception checks when using the Seek action to notice 
enchanted or possessed characters. If you aren't Seeking, the GM rolls a secret check anyway, with 
a –2 circumstance penalty, for you to notice the enchantment 
or possession. 
DISTRACTING SHADOWS FEAT 1
 You've learned to use larger folk to avoid drawing 
attention to yourself. You can use creatures that are at least one 
size larger than you (usually Medium or larger) as cover for the 
Hide and Sneak actions (see page 158).
KEEN EYES FEAT 1
 Your eyes are sharp, and your other senses are 
similarly attuned to your surroundings. When you 
attack an opponent that is concealed from you or sensed by you, 
reduce the flat check DC you need to hit that creature to 3 for 
concealed or 9 for sensed. You gain a +2 circumstance bonus 
when using the Seek action to sense unseen creatures within 
30 feet. 
LUCKY HALFLING FEAT 1
 Frequency
 once per day
Trigger
 You fail a skill check or saving throw.
Your happy-go-lucky nature makes it seem like misfortune avoids 
you, and to an extent, that's true. You can reroll the triggering 
check or saving throw and take the better of the two results.
PLUCKY FEAT 1
 You are easily able to ward off attempts to play 
on your fears and emotions. If you succeed at a saving throw 
against an emotion or fear Effect, treat your result as a critical 
success instead of a success. 
SURE–FOOTED FEAT 1
 If you succeed at an Acrobatics check to Balance 
or an Athletics check to Climb, you get a critical success instead 
of a success. You're not flat-footed when you attempt to Balance 
or Climb. For more about these skills and their uses, see pages 
144 and 146, respectively.
TITAN SLINGER FEAT 1
 You have learned how to use your sling to fell 
big creatures. You gain a +1 circumstance bonus to damage 
rolls with slings against Large or larger creatures. This bonus 
increases to +2 on critical hits (and then doubles on a critical 
hit as normal).
UNFETTERED FEAT 1
 Trigger
 You roll an Acrobatics check to Escape, an 
Athletics check to Break a Grapple, or a saving throw against an 
Effect that would entangle or grab you, or you use your Fortitude 
DC to resist a Grapple.
You were forced into service as a laborer, either pressed into 
indenture or shackled by the evils of slavery, but you've since 
escaped and have trained to ensure you'll never labor against 
your will again. You gain a +2 circumstance bonus to the 
triggering check or your Fortitude DC.
WEAPON FAMILIARITY [HALFLING] FEAT 1
 You favor traditional halfling weapons. You are 
trained with slings, sling staves, and shortswords.
In addition, you gain access to all uncommon halfling 
weapons. For the purpose of proficiencies, you treat martial 
halfling weapons as simple weapons and exotic halfling weapons 
as martial weapons. For more information about weapons, see 
page 178.
WEAPON TRICKSTER [HALFLING] FEAT 5
 Prerequisites
 Weapon Familiarity (Halfling)
You are particularly adept at fighting with your people's favored 
weapons. Whenever you critically succeed at an attack roll using 
a weapon of the sling group, a shortsword, or a halfling weapon, 
you apply the weapon's critical specialization Effect.

OVERVIEW
Humans' empires and nations are 
vast, sprawling things, and their 
citizens carve names for themselves with the strength of 
their sword arms and the power of their spells. Humanity 
is both diverse and tumultuous, running the gamut from cruel 
to kind, from sinister to saintlike. And while humans build large nation states 
and free cities alike, many of them venture forth to explore, leaving their homes 
to map uncharted realms, search for long-lost treasure, or lead mighty armies 
to conquer their neighbors for no better reason than because they can. Human variety also manifests in their governments, attitudes, and social 
norms. Though the oldest of human cultures trace their histories thousands 
of years into the past, when compared to the societies of the elves or dwarves, 
human civilizations seem to be in a constant state of flux, as empires fragment 
and new kingdoms subsume the old. 
Humans typically reach physical adulthood at the age of 18. A typical 
human can live to be around 90 years old. Humans often intermarry with 
other peoples, giving rise to children who bear traits of both parents. The most 
notable half-humans are half-elves and half-orcs. Humans worship a wide 
range of gods and practice many different religions. For many humans, adventuring serves as a means to an end, whether that 
end is accumulating wealth, striving for acclaim, increasing in social status, or 
uncovering arcane knowledge and power.
HIT POINTS 8 | SIZE Medium | SPEED 25 feet
ABILITY BOOSTS 
 Free
 Free
LANGUAGES
Common 
One additional language, selected from 
those to which you have access

BONUS LANGUAGES
At 1st level, if your Intelligence score is 
14 or higher, you can also select one of 
the languages from the list of common 
languages on page 40 or from other 
languages you have access to.
TRAITS
Human
Humanoid
As unpredictable and varied as any the peoples on Golarion, humans have the exceptional 
drive and capacity to endure and expand. Though many civilizations thrived before 
humanity rose to prominence, humans have built some of the greatest and the most 
terrible societies throughout the course of history, and today they are the most populous 
people in the realms around the Inner Sea.
HUMAN
ETHNICITIES
A variety of human ethnic groups make up the populace 
of the continents bordering Golarion's Inner Sea. Many of 
these groups have origins on distant lands, but the realms 
of the Inner Sea region have diverse populations drawn 
from across the globe. Human characters can be from any 
of these ethnicities, regardless of where they call home. Characters from these ethnicities speak Common if they 
come from the Inner Sea region, and some ethnicities give 
access to an uncommon language (see page 40).
GARUNDI
Garundi span the nations of northern Garund along 
the shores of the Inner Sea, and their clans are known 
for strength and empathy, treating their neighbors with 
compassion and respect. Their skin tones often range 
from dark brown to beige, and their tendency toward tall 
heights, broad shoulders, and high cheekbones makes them 
stand out. Garundi have access to the Osiriani language. 
KELESHITE
Tracing their origins to the Keleshite Empire in the 
deserts to the east, Keleshites carry a sense of the empire's superiority with them. They value boldness, wit, 
and luxuries. They commonly have black hair, brown 
eyes, and dark- to cool-brown skin. Fashions tend to incorporate loose, fiowing fabrics and headdresses and turbans. Keleshites have access to the Kelish language. 
KELLID
In the frozen mountains and tundra of the far north, 
Kellids live hard lives to survive the threats of the wild. 
They distrust magic, relying on skill and physical might 
when hunting and fighting. They are typically a brawny 
and dark-haired people. Their white skin is typically deeply 
tanned, and their eyes are often black, blue, or gray. They 
bear their scars with pride, and many wear animal furs and 
bone fetishes. Kellids have access to the Hallit language. 
MWANGI
Spread across the vast continent of Garund, from the 
sweltering deserts in the north to the dense jungles of the 
Mwangi Expanse, the Mwangi people are divided into 
four diverse subgroups: the Bekyar, the Bonuwat, the 
Mauxi, and the Zenj. Mwangi's skin tones range from 
black to dark brown to ocher, and they have black or dark 
brown hair. Mwangi have access to the Mwangi language.
NIDALESE
Nidalese hail from a culture that escaped destruction during 
the cataclysm of Earthfall, when a swarm of meteoroids 
carved out the Inner Sea. The ancient Nidalese pledged fealty 
to an evil shadow god to achieve salvation, and the grip of 
Zon-Kuthon has forever tainted these people since. Nidalese 
tend toward gray, ashy skin tones, with white, gray, or black 
hair. Nidalese have access to the Shadowtongue language.
SHOANTI
The Shoanti tribes were long ago pushed out of lush 
territory into the harsh badlands of the Storval Plateau in 
the nation of Varisia. Stalwart and tenacious, they remain 
oath-sworn to some day retake what they've lost. Their skin 
tones typically range from sepia to russet, and they're easily 
identifled by their shaved heads and traditional tattoos. 
Shoanti have access to the Shoanti language. 
TALDAN
Taldans, renowned as artisans, scholars, and soldiers, also 
have a reputation for self-importance and dismissiveness. 
The empire of Taldor once spanned almost half of the 
northern continent of Avistan, and it remains one of the 
oldest nations in the region despite its much diminished 
stature. Taldans often have brown hair, pale-white to deep-
bronze skin, and green or gray eyes. Their native language, 
Taldane, is so widespread that it is also called Common.
TIAN
Few in number in the Inner Sea region, Tians originally 
come from myriad nations in Tian Xia, a continent on 
the opposite side of the world. They tend to be shorter and slighter than people of other ethnicities, and they typically have dark hair. Their body types and skin tones 
vary greatly, as "Tian" is in fact a general term describing 
several ethnicities. Tians have access to the Tien language.
ULFEN
The coastal raiders of the Ulfen clans are skilled sailors and bodyguards. They're often tall, with fair to pale skin 
and blond, light-brown, or red hair. Prideful of their 
appearance, they groom extensively and dress in furs, horn, and ivory. Ulfen have access to the Skald language.
VARISIAN
Varisians historically favor a nomadic life of roving 
caravans, but today many settle into a less transient lifestyle in places like Ustalav and their namesake frontier 
nation. Their skin tones typically range from tawny beige to khaki. They have a wide variety of hair colors from platinum to red to brown, and their large, expressive eyes range into even rarer colors like violet or gold. Varisians 
have access to the Varisian language.
VUDRANI
Though the empire of Vudra is far to the east, it has a 
foothold in the Inner Sea on the island of Jalmeray. Vudrani 
culture is based on the perception of a soul's progression 
along a path of reincarnation toward enlightenment, 
making a dedication to self-improvement a hallmark of 
Vudrani culture. Vudrani typically have dark eyes and 
skin tones that run from umber to tawny. Their hair is 
often black and ranges in thickness and texture. Piercings, 
jewelry, and makeup are common adornments among 
Vudrani. Vudrani have access to the Vudrani language.
36 
HALF-ELVES
A half-elf is born to an elf and a human, or to two half-elves. The life of a half-elf can be difficult, marked by a 
struggle to fit in. Half-elves don't have their own homeland 
on Golarion, nor are populations of half-elves particularly 
tied to one another, since they often have very disparate 
human and elven heritages. Instead, most half-elves attempt 
to find acceptance in either human or elven settlements. Half-elves often appear primarily human, with subtly pointed ears and a taller stature than most full-blooded humans. Half-elves lack the almost alien eyes of their elf parents, though they do carry a natural presence—and often a striking beauty—that leads many to become 
artists or entertainers. Despite this innate appeal, many half-elves have difficulty forming lasting bonds with humans or elves due to the disconnection they feel from both peoples as a whole. Half-elves live longer than other humans, often reaching 
an age around 150 years. This causes some of them to 
fear friendship and romance with humans, knowing that 
they'll likely outlive their companions. 
PLAYING A HALF-ELF
You can create a half-elf character by selecting the Half-Elf 
human ancestry feat at 1st level. This gives you access 
to elf and half-elf ancestry feats in addition to human 
ancestry feats, from which you can select ancestry feats 
at a later level. 
HALF-ORCS
A half-orc is the offspring of a human and an orc, or in 
some cases, the offspring of two half-orcs. Because some 
bigoted humans see orcs as more akin to creatures than 
people, they sometimes hate and fear half-orcs simply due 
to their lineage. This commonly pushes half-orcs to the 
margins of society, where some find work in drudgery or 
as mercenaries, and others tragically fall into crime or 
cruelty. Many who can't stand the indignities heaped on 
them in human society find a home among their orc kin or 
trek out into the wilderness to live in peace. Humans often assume half-orcs are unintelligent or 
uncivilized, and half-orcs rarely find acceptance among 
societies with a large concentration of such folk. To an 
orc tribe, a half-orc is considered intelligent enough to 
make a good war leader but weaker than the other orcs. 
Consequently, many half-orcs end up having low status 
among orc tribes unless they can prove their strength. A half-orc has a shorter lifespan than other humans, 
living to be roughly 70 years old. 
PLAYING A HALF-ORC
You can create a half-orc character by selecting the Half-
Orc human ancestry feat at 1st level. This gives you access 
to orc and half-orc ancestry feats in addition to human 
ancestry feats, from which you can select ancestry feats 
at a later level. 
HUMAN ANCESTRY FEATS
At 1st level, you gain one ancestry feat, and you gain an 
additional ancestry feat every 4 levels thereafter (at 5th, 
9th, 13th, and 17th levels). As a human, you choose from 
among the following ancestry feats. 
ADAPTED SPELL FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 You are a spellcaster.
Study of multiple magical traditions reveals how to alter a 
spell to suit your spellcasting style. Choose one cantrip from a 
spell list other than your own. If you have a spell repertoire or 
spellbook, replace one of the cantrips you know or have in your 
spellbook with the chosen spell. If you prepare spells without a 
spellbook (if you're a cleric or druid, for example), one of your 
cantrips must always be the chosen spell, and you prepare the 
rest normally.
If you swap or retrain this cantrip later, you can choose its 
replacement from the same alternate list or a different one. For 
more about magic and spells, see page 192.
CLEVER IMPROVISER FEAT 1
 You've learned how to handle situations when 
you're out of your depth. You gain a +1 circumstance bonus to 
skill checks in which you're untrained.
COOPERATIVE NATURE FEAT 1
 A short human life span lends perspective and has 
taught you from a young age to set aside differences and work 
together to achieve greatness. You gain a +2 circumstance bonus 
to your check when you use the Aid reaction or Assist action 
(see page 307).
GENERAL TRAINING FEAT 1
 Your adaptability manifests in your mastery of a 
range of useful abilities. You gain a 1st-level general feat.
Special 
You can select this feat multiple times, choosing a 
different feat each time.
HALF–ELF FEAT 1
 Either one of your parents was an elf, or one or 
both were half-elves. You have pointed ears and 
other telltale signs of elf heritage. You gain the elf trait. Select 
two of the following benefits: elven speed (increase your Speed 
by 5 feet), elven tongue (add Elven to your list of languages), 
gifted speaker (you are trained in Diplomacy), or low-light vision 
(you can see in dim light as well as you can in bright light). In 
addition, you can select elf, half-elf, and human feats whenever 
you gain an ancestry feat.
Special 
You can select this feat twice. The second time, it loses 
the heritage trait and you gain the other two benefits.
HALF–ORC FEAT 1
 Either one of your parents was an orc, or one or 
both were half-orcs. You have a green tinge to 
your skin and other indicators of orc heritage. You gain the orc 
trait. Select two of the following benefits: intimidating visage 
(you are trained in Intimidation), low-light vision (you can see 
in dim light as well as you can in bright light), orc tongue (add 
Orcish to your list of languages), or orc toughness (gain 2 Hit 
Points). You can select orc, half-orc, and human feats whenever 
you gain an ancestry feat.
Special 
You can select this feat twice. The second time, it loses 
the heritage trait and you gain the other two benefits.
HAUGHTY OBSTINACY FEAT 1
 Your powerful ego makes it harder for others to 
order you around. If you succeed at a saving throw against a 
mental Effect that attempts to directly control your actions, you 
critically succeed instead. If a creature fails to Coerce you using the Intimidation skill 
(see page 150), it treats the result as a critical failure instead (so 
it can't try to Coerce you again for 1 week).
NATURAL AMBITION FEAT 1
 You were raised to be ambitious and always reach 
for the stars, causing you to progress quickly in your chosen 
field. You gain a 1st-level class feat for your class.
SKILLED FEAT 1
 Your ingenuity allows you to train in a wide variety 
of skills. You become trained in two skills of your choice. For 
more about skills, see page 142.
UNCONVENTIONAL WEAPONRY FEAT 1
 You've familiarized yourself with a weapon from 
another ancestry or culture. You gain access to an uncommon 
weapon with an ancestry trait of your choice. This doesn't change 
your proficiency for that weapon. For more about weapons, see 
page 178.
HALF-ELF AND HALF-ORC ANCESTRY FEATS
A human with elf or orc blood is called a half-elf or half-orc, which is represented by the corresponding heritage 
feats. If you have the Half-Elf or Half-Orc heritage feat, 
you can select from additional ancestry feats not available 
to other humans. 
HALF-ELF ANCESTRY FEATS
The following feats are available to half-elves. 
INSPIRE IMITATION FEAT 5
 You inspire your allies to great feats through your 
own actions. Whenever you critically succeed at a skill check, you 
automatically qualify to take the Aid reaction when attempting 
to help an ally at the same skill check, even without spending an 
action to prepare to do so.
SUPERNATURAL CHARM FEAT 5
The elven magic in your blood manifests as magic 
that makes you more appealing or alluring. You can cast 1st-level 
charm as an innate arcane spell once per day. For more about 
magic and spells, see page 192.
HALF-ORC ANCESTRY FEATS
The following feats are available to half-orcs. 
ORC FEROCITY FEAT 1
 Frequency
 once per day
Trigger
 You're reduced to 0 Hit Points.
Fierceness in battle runs through your blood, and you refuse 
to fall from your injuries. When this feat is triggered, you avoid 
being knocked out and remain at 1 Hit Point.
ORC SIGHT FEAT 5
 Your orc blood is strong enough to grant you the 
keen vision of your orc forebears. You gain low-light vision, 
allowing you to see in dim light just as well as you can in bright 
light. If you have low-light vision (from the Half-Orc feat), you 
instead gain darkvision, allowing you to see in darkness and 
dim light just as well as you can in bright light. Your vision in 
darkness is in black and white. 
ORC WEAPON CARNAGE FEAT 5
 Prerequisites
 Orc Weapon Familiarity (see below)
You are brutally efficient with the weapons of your orc ancestors. 
Whenever you critically hit using a two-handed weapon of 
the axe or sword group, or with an orc weapon, you apply the 
weapon's critical specialization Effect.
ORC WEAPON FAMILIARITY FEAT 1
 You favor the brutal weapons of your orc ancestors. 
You are trained with the greataxe and falchion.
In addition, you gain access to all uncommon orc weapons. For 
the purpose of proficiencies, you treat martial orc weapons as 
simple weapons and exotic orc weapons as martial weapons. For 
more about weapons, see page 178.
SUPERSTITION FEAT 1
 Orcs have a distrust of magic, and you have picked 
up these misgivings. You seek inner strength from 
your superstitions, granting you a +1 circumstance bonus to 
saves against spells and other magical Effects until the start of 
your next turn.
HUMAN ADVENTURERS
Some backgrounds make particularly good choices for 
humans. You might choose the farmhand background if you 
have just left home, the gladiator background if you've just 
earned your freedom, or the sailor background if you've 
recently returned from the roiling sea. You should look for 
a background that complements your class, granting you a 
boost to an ability score that the class values. 
When looking for a class, you are open to many class 
choices. Your character could be a young, bright-faced 
paladin ready to take on the world or a jaded wizard looking 
to leave it behind for a larger destiny in the planes of the 
Great Beyond—or anything in between.
38 
Backgrounds allow you to customize your character based on her life before adventuring. 
Your character's background can help you learn or portray more about her personality 
while suggesting what sorts of things she's likely to know. Each background grants two 
ability boosts, a bonus skill feat, and training in one Lore skill. A character can have only 
one background, chosen at 1st level, and it can't be changed.
ACOLYTE BACKGROUND
You spent your early days in a religious monastery or cloister. 
You may have traveled out into the world to spread the message 
of your religion or because you cast away the teachings of 
your faith, but deep inside you'll always carry the lessons 
you learned. Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Constitution or 
Wisdom, and one is a free ability boost.
You gain the Student of the Canon skill feat, and you're trained 
in the Lore skill corresponding to your deity (such as Desna Lore 
or Sarenrae Lore).
ACROBAT BACKGROUND
In a circus or on the streets, you earned your pay by performing 
as an acrobat. You might have turned to adventuring when the 
money dried up, or when you learned to put skills to better use.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Strength or 
Dexterity, and one is a free ability boost.
You gain the Steady Balance skill feat, and you're trained in 
the Circus Lore skill.
ANIMAL WHISPERER BACKGROUND
You have always felt a connection to animals, and it was only a 
small leap to learn to train them. As you travel, you continuously 
encounter different creatures, befriending them along the way.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Wisdom or 
Charisma, and one is a free ability boost.
You gain the Train Animal skill feat, and you're trained in the 
Animal Lore skill.
BARKEEP BACKGROUND
You have five specialties: hefting barrels, polishing steins, 
drinking, drinking, and drinking. You ran or worked in a bar, 
where you learned how to hold your liquor and rowdily socialize.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Constitution or 
Charisma, and one is a free ability boost.
You gain the Hobnobber skill feat, and you're trained in the 
Alcohol Lore skill.
BLACKSMITH BACKGROUND
You were a blacksmith or a blacksmith's apprentice, and during 
countless hours toiling at the forge, you learned how to smith 
armor and weapons. Perhaps you worked hard each day and 
dreamed of adventure each night, or perhaps the adventuring 
life was thrust upon you by a pivotal event.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Strength or 
Intelligence, and one is a free ability boost.
You gain the Specialty Crafting skill feat for blacksmithing, 
and you're trained in the Smithing Lore skill.
CRIMINAL BACKGROUND
As an unscrupulous independent or as a member of an underworld organization, you lived a life of crime. You might 
have become an adventurer to seek redemption, to escape the 
law, or simply to get access to bigger and better loot.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Dexterity or 
Intelligence, and one is a free ability boost.
You gain the Experienced Smuggler skill feat, and you're 
trained in the Underworld Lore skill.
ENTERTAINER BACKGROUND
Through an education in the arts or sheer, dogged practice, you 
learned to entertain crowds. You might have been an actor, a 
dancer, a musician, a magician, or any other sort of performer. 
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Dexterity or 
Charisma, and one is a free ability boost.
You gain the Fascinating Performance skill feat, and you're 
trained in the Entertainment Lore skill.
FARMHAND BACKGROUND
With a strong back and an understanding of seasonal cycles, you 
tilled the land and tended crops. Your farm could have been razed 
by invaders, you could have lost the family tying you to the land, 
or you might have simply tired of the drudgery, but at some point 
you became an adventurer.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Constitution or 
Wisdom, and one is a free ability boost.
You gain the Assurance skill feat with Athletics, and you're 
trained in the Farming Lore skill.
GLADIATOR BACKGROUND
The bloody games of the arena taught you the art of combat. 
BACKGROUNDS
39 
Before you attained true fame, you departed—or escaped—the 
arena to explore the world. Your skill at drawing both blood and 
a crowd's attention pay off in a new adventuring life.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Strength or 
Charisma, and one is a free ability boost.
You gain the Fascinating Performance skill feat, and you're 
trained in the Gladiatorial Lore skill.
HUNTER BACKGROUND
You stalk and take down animals and other creatures of the 
wild. Skinning animals, harvesting their flesh, and cooking them 
were also part of your training, all of which can give you useful 
resources while you adventure.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Dexterity or 
Wisdom, and one is a free ability boost.
You gain the Survey Wildlife skill feat, and you're trained in 
the Hunting Lore skill.
LABORER BACKGROUND
You have spent years performing arduous physical labor, 
perhaps against your will. It was a difficult life, but you somehow 
survived. You may have embraced adventuring as an easier 
method to make your way in the world, or you might adventure 
under someone else's command.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Strength or 
Constitution, and one is a free ability boost.
You gain the Robust Recovery skill feat, and you're trained in 
the Labor Lore skill.
MERCHANT BACKGROUND
In a dusty shop, market stall, or merchant caravan, you bartered 
wares for coin and trade goods. The skills you picked up still 
apply in the adventuring life, in which a deal on a suit of armor 
could save your life.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Intelligence or 
Charisma, and one is a free ability boost.
You gain the Bargain Hunter skill feat, and you're trained in 
the Mercantile Lore skill.
NOBLE BACKGROUND
To the common folk, the life of a noble seems one of idyllic luxury, 
but growing up as a noble or member of the aspiring gentry, you 
know the reality: a noble's lot is obligation and intrigue. Whether 
you seek to escape your duties by adventuring or to thereby 
better your station, you have traded silks and pageantry for an 
adventurer's life.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Intelligence or 
Charisma, and one is a free ability boost.
You gain the Courtly Graces skill feat, and you're trained in the 
Nobility Lore skill.
NOMAD BACKGROUND
Traveling far and wide, you picked up basic tactics for surviving 
on the road and in unknown lands, getting by with few supplies 
and even fewer comforts. As an adventurer, you travel still, often 
into even more dangerous places.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Constitution or 
Wisdom, and one is a free ability boost.
You gain the Assurance skill feat with Survival, and you're 
trained in a Lore skill related to one terrain you traveled in (such 
as Desert Lore or Swamp Lore).
SAILOR BACKGROUND
You heard the call of the sea from a young age. Perhaps you 
signed onto a merchant's vessel, joined the navy, or even fell in 
with a crew of pirates and scallywags.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Strength or 
Dexterity, and one is a free ability boost.
You gain the Underwater Marauder skill feat, and you're 
trained in the Sailing Lore skill.
SCHOLAR BACKGROUND
You have a knack for learning, and from a young age, you 
sequestered yourself from the outside world to learn all that you 
could. You've read about so many wondrous places and things in 
your books, and you've always dreamed about one day seeing 
the real things. Eventually, that curiosity led you to leave your 
studies and become an adventurer.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Intelligence or 
Wisdom, and one is a free ability boost.
Choose Arcana, Nature, Occultism, or Religion; you gain the 
Assurance skill feat in your chosen skill. You're trained in the 
Academia Lore skill.
SCOUT BACKGROUND
You called the wilderness home as you hunted game, found trails, 
and guided travelers. Your wanderlust could have called you to 
the adventuring life, or perhaps you were serving as a scout for 
soldiers and found you liked battle.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Dexterity or 
Wisdom, and one is a free ability boost.
You gain the Forager skill feat, and you're trained in the 
Scouting Lore skill.
STREET URCHIN BACKGROUND
You eked out a living by picking pockets on the streets of a major 
city, never knowing where you'd find your next meal. While some 
folk adventure for the glory, you adventure as a means of survival.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Dexterity or 
Intelligence, and one is a free ability boost.
You gain the Pickpocket skill feat, and you're trained in the 
Underworld Lore skill.
WARRIOR BACKGROUND
As a warrior in a tribe or a member of a militia or army, you 
waded into battle in your younger days. You might have wanted 
to break out from the regimented structure of these forces, or 
could have always been as independent a warrior as you are now.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Strength or 
Constitution, and one is a free ability boost.
You gain the Quick Repair skill feat, and you're trained in the 
Warfare Lore skill.
40 
Your character's ancestry section states which 
languages she speaks at 1st level. Having an 
Intelligence score of 14 or higher also grants one 
additional language, which you can choose from the list 
presented in your character's ancestry entry and from 
those available from your region or ethnicity. 
The languages presented in this section are grouped according to how commonly they are found throughout the Inner Sea region. Languages that are common are regularly found in most places, even among those who 
aren't native speakers. Languages that are uncommon are 
most frequently spoken by native speakers, but they are also spoken by certain scholars and others interested in 
those associated cultures. Pathfinder also includes Druidic, which is a secret language. Druidic is not available to characters who are not druids, and druids are prohibited from teaching the 
language to nondruids, as described further on page 81.
It is, of course, possible for your character to 
learn languages later in her adventuring career. The 
Multilingual feat (see page 169), for example, grants two new languages that can be chosen from the languages listed in the common and uncommon tables below. Other 
abilities and effects might grant access to common or uncommon languages as detailed in their descriptions. 
TABLE 2—2: COMMON 
LANGUAGES
Language Speakers 
Common Humans, dwarves, elves, halflings, and other 
common ancestriesDraconicDragons, reptilian humanoids
Dwarven
Dwarves
Elven
Elves, half-elves
GnomishGnomesGoblinGoblins, hobgoblins, bugbearsHalflingHalflingsJotunGiants, ogres, trolls, ettins, cyclopes
Orcish
Orcs, half-orcs
Sylvan
Fey, centaurs, plant creatures
Undercommon
Drow, duergar, morlocks
TABLE 2—2: UNCOMMON 
LANGUAGES
LanguageSpeakersAbyssal
DemonsAkloDerros, otherworldly monsters, evil fey
Aquan
Aquatic creatures, water elemental 
creatures
Auran
Flying creatures, air elemental creatures
CelestialAngelsGnollGnollsIgnanFire creatures
InfernalDevils
NecrilGhouls, intelligent undeadShadowtongue
Nidalese, Shadow Plane creatures
Terran
Earth creatures
TABLE 2—2: SECRET LANGUAGE
LanguageSpeakersDruidicDruids (see page 81)
SIGN LANGUAGE
Your character might use sign language instead of spoken 
language. This is especially common for a character who is deaf or hard of hearing or who can't speak. In this 
case, your character can communicate using the sign languages associated with the languages she selects, as well as being able to read and write the written forms of those languages. When you first choose your character's languages, you 
must decide whether she knows the sign language versions 
of all of her languages or their spoken versions. If you 
choose sign language instead of spoken language, your 
character receives Read Lips (see page 170) as a bonus 
feat. However, if your character is unable to speak, that 
feat may not convey the ability to speak. A deaf or hard 
of hearing character can't use hearing as an imprecise 
sense (see page 301). Should your character lose or gain 
her sense of hearing during the game, she can spend 
downtime retraining her languages from spoken to signed 
or vice versa. If you're playing a hearing character who 
would know one or more sign languages as a result of her 
backstory (for example, a hearing character with a deaf 
parent), you may get Sign Language (see page 171) as a 
bonus feat at the GM's discretion.


LANGUAGES
The people of the Inner Sea region speak dozens of different languages, along with hundreds 
of dialects and regional variations. While a character can generally get by speaking Taldane, 
also known as Common, knowing another language is vital in some regions. Being able to 
speak these tongues can help you in negotiation, spying on enemies, or just conducting 
simple commerce. Languages also afford you the chance to contextualize your character in 
the world and give meaning to other character choices.

41
Sign languages typically require both hands to convey more than basic concepts, and they require direct visual attention to understand. Since they are quiet, they are ideal 
for inflltrations in exploration mode, but the required 
attention makes them extremely difficult to understand in combat. Much as a character can't engage in complex 
spoken dialogue while swinging a sword, a character can't communicate a hefty amount of information in sign 
language during combat, but simple concepts such as designating a target, mocking a foe, or signaling an ally to 
look out can be conveyed through signs as easily as shouted 
words. Using sign language in some situations, such as areas of low visibility, can be tricky—just as it can be 
difficult to communicate verbally in a noisy environment. 
LANGUAGES IN THE GAME
Learning a new language affords your character opportunities, particularly if you choose a language to fit 
the adventure, such as learning Undercommon before an 
adventure in the Darklands. While in most cases you can 
eventually find an NPC who also speaks Common, knowing 
the language yourself allows you to hear what the NPCs are 
saying to each other and appeal to NPCs other than your 
translator. Your whole party could even learn a little-known 
language that you use for secret communications!  
REGIONAL LANGUAGES
The table below lists the languages of languages of Golarion's 
Inner Sea and regions where they're widely spoken. Regional 
languages are uncommon. However, if your character hails 
from a language's region, she has access to that language. 
Note that in the Inner Sea region of Golarion, the language 
mechanically referred to as Common is the same as Taldane, 
the language that originates from the Empire of Taldor, which 
formerly controlled much of that area.
TABLE 2—2: REGIONAL LANGUAGES
LanguageRegions
HallitIrrisen, Mendev, Realm of the Mammoth Lords, 
Numeria, SarkorisKelish
Absalom, Katapesh, Qadira
Mwangi
Mwangi Expanse, Sargava, the Shackles, 
the Sodden Lands, ThuviaOsirianiAbsalom, Geb, Katapesh, Mana Wastes, Nex, 
Osirion, Rahadoum, ThuviaShoantiBelkzen, Varisia
SkaldIrrisen, Lands of the Linnorm Kings, Ustalav
TienAbsalom, Lands of the Linnorm Kings, Realm of 
the Mammoth Lords, Tian Xia
Varisian
Brevoy, Lastwall, Nidal, Nirmathas, Ustalav, Varisia
Vudrani
Jalmeray, Katapesh, Nex
42 
Although there are a limited number of character 
classes from which you can choose, there are 
unlimited character concepts that these rules 
allow you to bring to life. Perhaps your character is a 
brilliant but scatterbrained alchemist who can rattle off 
complex formulas for alchemical items but has trouble 
remembering his best friend's birthday. Or perhaps 
she's a muscle-bound swordswoman who becomes as 
immovable as a mountain when she hoists a shield. 
Maybe your character is a hot-tempered sorcerer whose 
gesticulating fingers pulse with light from an angelic 
ancestor. The choices you make for your character 
within her class—such as a cleric's choice of god, a 
fighter's choice of weapon, or a sorcerer's bloodline—
bring these visions to life within the context of the rules. The following entries describe Pathfinder's 12 core 
classes, containing the information you need to play a character of that class from level 1 to 20. Once you choose your character's class, the game's rules provide 
optional archetypes that allow you to further customize her abilities, though these rules (described on page 279) are not recommended for beginners. Additionally, the 
game includes multiclass archetypes that allow her to gain abilities from other classes. 
READING CLASS ENTRIES
Each class entry includes information about typical members 
of the class, as well as suggestions for roleplaying characters 
of that class and playing such characters in the game's 
various modes. Each class provides your character with an 
ability boost in a key ability score, a number of Hit Points 
she receives at each level, her proficiencies in various abilities 
and equipment, signature skills in which she can excel, 
special abilities from her class features, and more. Your 
character's class entry also provides all of the information 
needed when she gains levels, so it will be a vital reference 
to you throughout the course of your campaign. 
The elements of each entry are described below. 
PLAYING THE CLASS
This section suggests ways to use abilities and skills that 
the class provides your character in the game's various 
modes of play. You aren't obligated to play your character 
as this section describes, but it is a helpful guideline. 
ROLEPLAYING THE CLASS
This section provides background information about the 
interests and tendencies of typical members of the class, as well as information about how others in the world tend to view such characters. This can help inspire you in how you determine your character's actions and define 
her personality.
KEY ABILITY
This is the ability score that you'll use to determine the 
Difficulty Class (DC) associated with your character's 
class features or feats. This is called your class DC. If 
your character is of a spellcasting class, this key ability is 
also used to calculate spell DCs and similar values. Most 
classes are associated with one key ability score, but some 
require you to choose from two options. Additionally, when you choose your character's class, 
she gains an ability boost in her key ability. For more about 
ability boosts, see page 43.
HIT POINTS
This tells you how many Hit Points your character gains from her class at each level. To determine your character's 
43
starting Hit Points, add together the Hit Points she receives from her ancestry, her Constitution modifier, and 
the number listed in this entry.

Just as your character's ancestry plays a key role in expressing her identity and worldview, her 
class indicates the training she has developed and will improve upon as an adventurer. Groups 
of players often wish to create characters whose skills and abilities synergize mechanically, 
and in this respect, choosing your character's class is perhaps the most important decision 
you will make for her. 

Each time your character gains a level, she receives an additional number of Hit Points equal to this number plus her Constitution modifier. For more about calculating 
your character's Constitution modifier and determining 
her Hit Points, see page 14.
PROFICIENCIES
This lists the degree to which your character is trained 
in key aspects of the game's mechanics. This training 
is called her proficiency rank, and your character's 
proficiency rank in a mechanic determines her modifier 
when she makes a roll using that mechanic. Proficiency 
ranks range from untrained to legendary, and the 
associated modifiers range from your character's level 
minus 2 to her level plus 3. For more about proficiency 
ranks, see page 8. 
Each class entry typically specifies your character's 
proficiency rank in Perception, saving throws, weapons, 
and armor. If a mechanic isn't listed in your character's 
class entry, her proficiency rank in that mechanic is 
considered untrained unless she gains training from 
another source. Additionally, this section indicates the number of skills 
in which your character is trained. When you choose 
your character's class, you also select a number of skills 
equal to this number; your character gains the trained 
proficiency rank in those skills. If your character has a 
high Intelligence score, she's trained in a higher number 
of skills. 
Spellcasting classes provide proficiency in spells, which 
is further detailed in each class's entry. 
SIGNATURE SKILLS
This entry lists the skills in which members of your 
character's class are naturally adept. In most cases, it's 
a good idea to allocate your character's starting skill 
proficiencies to her signature skills, though doing so is not required. At higher levels, your character can increase her proficiency ranks in these skills to master or legendary. 
She typically cannot do so in nonsignature skills. 
ADVANCEMENT TABLE
This table summarizes the abilities, feats, skill increases, 
ability boosts, and other benefits your character gains 
as she advances in level. The first column of the class 
table indicates a level, and the second column lists each 
feature your character receives when she reaches that 
level. The 1st-level entry includes a reminder to select 
your ancestry and background. 
CLASS FEATURES
This section lists all the abilities a class grants your 
character. Abilities gained at higher levels list the requisite 
levels next to the features' names. Class features include the sections detailed below.
Class Feats
This section specifies the levels at which your character gains class feats, which are special feats that only members 
of her class can access. Class feats are granted beginning 
at 1st or 2nd level, depending on the class. Specific class feats are detailed at the end of each class entry.
Skill Feats
This section specifies the levels at which your character gains a feat with the skill trait, called a skill feat. 
Skill feats can be found in the Feats chapter beginning 
on page 160. At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, 
most classes gain a skill feat, though rogues gain them 
earlier and more often. Your character must be at least 
trained in the corresponding skill to take a skill feat. 
General Feats
This section specifies the levels at which your character gains a general feat. Most classes grant a general feat at 
3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter. At each of these 
levels, you can select any general feat (including skill feats) as long as your character qualifies for it. More information about feats can be found in the Feats chapter beginning on page 160.
Skill Increases
This section specifies the levels at which your character can increase her proficiency rank in a skill. At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, most classes grant a skill 
increase, though rogues gain them earlier and more often. Your character can use this skill increase to either become 
trained in one skill in which she's untrained or become an 
expert in one skill in which she's already trained.
If your character is at least 7th level, she can use this skill increase to become a master of a signature skill of which she's already an expert. If she's at least 15TH LEVEL, she can use this increase to become legendary in a signature skill of which she's already a master.
Ability Boosts
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, your character 
boosts four different ability scores. Your character can 
use these ability boosts to increase her ability scores 
above 18. Boosting an ability score increases it by 1 if 
it's already 18 or above, or by 2 if it starts out below 18. 
For more about ability boosts and applying them during 
character creation, see page 18.
Ancestry Feats
This section serves as a reminder of the ancestry feat 
your character gains at 5th, 9th, 13th, and 17th levels. 
Ancestry feats are detailed in each ancestry entry in 
Chapter 2, which begin on page 22.
44
There's no sight more beautiful to you than a strange brew bubbling 
in your laboratory's beakers, and you consume your various creations 
with abandon. Perhaps you're fascinated with uncovering the secrets of 
magic and science, or perhaps you simply like to watch volatile chemical 
reactions. Regardless, you're constantly experimenting in your lab or on 
the go with inventive concoctions tweaked for any eventuality. With your 
fearlessness in the face of risk, your unique path toward greatness is lined 
with alchemical brews that push your mind and body to their limits.
ALCHEMIST
45 
KEY ABILITY
Intelligence
HIT POINTS
8 plus Constitution Modifier
PROFICIENCIES
PERCEPTION
Trained 
SAVING THROWS
Expert in Fortitude
Expert in Reflex
Trained in Will
SKILLS
Trained in a number of skills equal to 
2 plus your Intelligence modifier
WEAPONS
Trained in simple weapons
Trained in alchemical bombs
ARMOR
Trained in light armor
SIGNATURE SKILLS
Arcana
Crafting
Medicine
PLAYING AN ALCHEMIST
Players of alchemist characters might approach gameplay in the following ways:

ŁDuring combat, you lob bombs at your foes and harry your enemies while
supporting the rest of the party with your potent elixirs. At higher levels, you
toughen your body using mutagens.

ŁDuring social encounters, you provide knowledge and experience about
alchemical items and related secrets, like poisons and diseases.

ŁIn exploration mode, you keep an eye out for trouble with your bombs at the
ready while giving advice on all things alchemical and mysterious.

ŁIn downtime mode, you spend time in an alchemical lab brewing elixirs, making
bombs, and furthering your alchemical knowledge.
ROLEPLAYING AN ALCHEMIST
Alchemists pursue scientific innovation above all else, combining incredible 
powers from the natural world through the force of their keen intellect and 
insatiable curiosity.
IF YOU'RE AN ALCHEMIST, YOU LIKELY...

ŁEnjoy tinkering with strange formulas and alchemical reagents, often with
single-minded dedication and recklessness that give others pause.

ŁGet a kick out of wreaking havoc with the alchemical concoctions you've made,
and enjoy watching things burn, dissolve, freeze, and jolt.

ŁEndlessly experiment toward the discovery of new, more potent alchemical and
magical tools. 

OTHERS PROBABLY...

ŁThink you're at least a bit strange and don't understand your zeal for alchemy,
creativity, and invention.

ŁFear that your creations are dangerous or volatile—or both.

ŁAssume that if you haven't caused a catastrophe with your experimentations,
you inevitably will.

ŁThink that you're some kind of sorcerer or an eccentric wizard and don't
understand that you're not a spellcaster; real spellcasters clumsily dabbling in
alchemy only heighten this misconception. 
CLASS FEATURES
You gain these abilities as an alchemist. Abilities gained at higher levels list 
the requisite levels next to the features' names. 
ADVANCED ALCHEMY
You gain the Alchemical Crafting feat (see page 162), even if you don't meet 
that feat's prerequisites, and you gain the four additional common 1st-level 
alchemical formulas that feat grants. The list of alchemical items begins on page 360. You can use this feat to create common alchemical items as long as you have their formulas in your formula book, though their power is fleeting. You can create these items in two different ways, as described below. An 
alchemical item you create this way has the infused trait. First, during your daily preparations (described on page 332), you can create items for which you have the formulas. Creating items in this way requires 
spending 1 Resonance Point to create a batch of alchemical items of that type 
with the infused trait. You select how many items are in the batch, up to half 
the normal maximum batch size (half a typical batch is two items, but see the Crafting 
Trained Activities section on page for more information). You don't 
need to attempt a Crafting check to do this, and you ignore the number of days typically required to create the items and any requirements of alchemical 
46
reagents. You can't overspend Resonance Points to create 
infused items in this way during your daily preparations. Second, you can create alchemical items with the Quick Alchemy action, described below. 

STUDIED RESONANCE
Knowledge, rather than personality, fuels your 
interactions with alchemical and magical substances and 
devices. Your maximum number of Resonance Points 
is equal to your character level plus your Intelligence 
modifier (instead of your Charisma modifier).
ALCHEMIST FEATS
At 1st level and every even-numbered level thereafter, 
you gain an alchemist class feat. Alchemist class feats 
are described beginning on page 48.
SKILL FEATS 2ND
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a 
skill feat. Skill feats can be found in Chapter 5 and 
have the skill trait. You must be trained or better in the 
corresponding skill to select a skill feat. 
EMPOWER BOMBS 3RD
When you craft an alchemical item with the bomb and infused traits—hereafter referred to in this entry as a bomb—you can empower it. You can empower only a 1st-level bomb, increasing its level and causing it to deal 
more damage. This also increases any persistent damage dealt by the bomb, but not its splash damage.
Ł At 3rd level, you can create 3rd-level bombs that deal 
double the bomb's base damage as presented in its entry. 
For instance, if you created a flask of 3rd-level empowered 
alchemist's fire (see page 360), it would deal 2d6 fire damage, 
2 persistent fire damage, and 1 splash damage on a hit.

Ł At 7th level, you can create 7th-level bombs that deal three 
times the base damage.
Ł At 11th level, you can create 11th-level bombs dealing four 
times the base damage.
Ł At 15th level, you can create 15th-level bombs that deal 
five times the base damage, and attack rolls with your 
empowered bombs gain a +1 item bonus.

Ł At 19th level, you can create 19th-level bombs that deal 
six times the base damage, and attack rolls with your 
empowered bombs gain a +2 item bonus.
GENERAL FEATS 3RD
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a general 
feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.
SKILL INCREASES 3RD
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a 
skill increase. You can use this increase to either become 
trained in one skill you're untrained in or become an expert in one skill in which you're already trained. 

TABLE 3–1: ALCHEMIST ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level
Class Features
1 Advanced alchemy, alchemist feat, ancestry feat, 
background, formula book, initial proficiencies, 
studied resonance
2 Alchemist feat, skill feat
3 Empower bombs (fi2), general feat, skill increase
4 Alchemist feat, skill feat 
5 Ability boosts, ancestry feat, mutagen crafting, 
skill increase
6 Alchemist feat, skill feat
7 Empower bombs (fi3), general feat, skill increase
8 Alchemist feat, skill feat
9 Ancestry feat, expanded resonance, skill increase
10 Ability boosts, alchemist feat, skill feat
11 Empower bombs (fi4), general feat, skill increase
12 Alchemist feat, skill feat
13 Ancestry feat, double elixir, skill increase
14 Alchemist feat, skill feat
15 Ability boosts, empower bombs (fi5), general feat, 
skill increase
16 Alchemist feat, skill feat
17 Alchemical alacrity, ancestry feat, skill increase
18 Alchemist feat, skill feat
19 Empower bombs (fi6), general feat, skill increase
20 Ability boosts, alchemist feat, skill feat
 
 QUICK ALCHEMY
 Cost 1 Resonance Point
Requirements 
You must have alchemist's tools (see page 
184), the formula of the alchemical item you're creating, and 
a free hand.
You create a single common alchemical item that is of your 
level or lower without having to spend the normal monetary cost 
in alchemical reagents or needing to attempt a Crafting check. 
This item has the infused trait, but it remains potent only until 
the start of your next turn. After this period, the item becomes 
inert and grants no effects. If you overspend Resonance Points 
to use this ability and fail the flat check (see page 292), you 
can't use the Quick Alchemy action again until the next time you 
undertake your daily preparations.
FORMULA BOOK
You start with a standard formula book worth 10 sp or 
less (as detailed on page 186) for free. The formula book contains formulas for your choice of 4 common 1st-level alchemical items. The list of alchemical items begins on page 360. Each time you gain a new level, you can add formulas 
for two alchemical items to your formula book. These can be of any level of item you can create. You learn these 
formulas automatically, but it's also possible to find or 
buy other formulas, or to invent them with the Inventor feat (see page 167).

Alchemist
47 
If you are at least 7th level, you can use this increase to become a master 
in a signature skill in which you're already an expert. If you are at least 
15th level, you can use this increase to become legendary in a signature 
skill in which you're already a master.
MUTAGEN CRAFTING 5TH
You learn the secret of mutagens. When you gain a new level and add new 
formulas to your book, you can select formulas for uncommon alchemical 
items with the mutagen trait. 
ABILITY BOOSTS 5TH
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four different ability 
scores. You can use these ability boosts to increase your ability scores 
above 18. Boosting an ability score increases it by 1 if it's already 18 or 
above, or by 2 if it starts out below 18.
ANCESTRY FEATS 5TH
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain an ancestry feat 
at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter. The list of ancestry feats open to 
you can be found in your ancestry's entry in Chapter 2.
EXPANDED RESONANCE 9TH
You gain a number of bonus Resonance Points equal to half your level. 
You can use these bonus Resonance Points only when using the Quick 
Alchemy action. 
DOUBLE ELIXIR 13TH
When using the Quick Alchemy action, instead of 
spending 1 Resonance Point to 
create a single item, you can spend 
up to 2 Resonance Points to make 
up to two alchemical items as described 
in that action. These items need not be 
the same. 
ALCHEMICAL ALACRITY 17TH
When using the Quick Alchemy action, 
you can spend up to 3 Resonance 
Points to make up to three alchemical 
items as described in that action (1 
per Resonance Point spent). These 
items need not be the same. 
KEY TERMS
You'll see the following key terms in many 
alchemist abilities. 
Additive:
 Feats that allow you to spend 
actions to add special substances into 
bombs or elixirs have the additive trait. 
You can add only one additive to a single 
alchemical item, and attempting to add 
another spoils the item. You can typically 
take actions with the additive trait only 
when you're creating an infused alchemical 
item, and some can be used only with the 
Quick Alchemy action. 
Infused: 
An alchemical item with the 
infused trait doesn't cost its crafter any 
Resonance Points to activate (whether 
using Operate Activation or any other 
relevant action), though anyone 
else must spend Resonance Points 
to activate it normally. An infused 
item is potent for only 24 hours, 
after which it becomes inert.
48 
ALCHEMIST FEATS
If you need to look up an alchemist feat 
by name instead of by level, use this table.
Feat
Level
Alchemical Familiar
1 Alchemical Savant
1 Awakened Intellect
14 Calculated Splash
4 Combine Elixirs8 Craft Philosopher's Stone
20 Debilitating Bomb
6 Delayed Bomb
6 Double Mutagen14 Eflcient Alchemy4 Enduring Alchemy4 Eternal Elixir16 Expanded Splash10 Exploitive Bomb
16 Extend Elixir12 Far Lobber
1 Fast Onset
6 Feral Mutagen
8 Genius Mutagen16 Glib Mutagen14 Greater Debilitating Bomb
10 Improbable Elixirs
18 Invincible Mutagen12 Laboratory Safety
12 Mindblank Mutagen18 Miracle Worker
18 Perfect Debilitation
18 Perfect Medicine
16 Perfect Mutagen
20 Persistent Mutagen
16 Poison Antidote
6 Poison Panacea
20 Poison Resistance
4 Poison Touch
12 Potent Poisoner
10 Powerful Alchemy
8 Precise Bombs
6 Quick Bomber1 Revivifying Mutagen
10 Smoke Bomb
1 Stalker Mutagen
10 Sticky Bombs
10 Strong Medicine
8 Tricky Tinker 
8 True Debilitating Bomb
14 Uncanny Bombs
12 Universal Empowerment
20 
ALCHEMIST FEATS
At every level that you gain an alchemist feat, you can select one of the following 
feats. You must satisfy any prerequisites before selecting an alchemist feat.
1ST LEVEL
ALCHEMICAL FAMILIAR FEAT 1
 You have created life via alchemy, though only a simple creature formed 
from alchemical materials and a bit of your own blood. This alchemical familiar assists 
you in your laboratory and adventuring, like any other familiar (see Familiars on page 
287 for more information).
ALCHEMICAL SAVANT FEAT 1
 You can identify alchemical items quickly. When trained in the Arcana skill 
and attempting to use its Identify Magic action (see page 145) on an alchemical item you 
hold, you can do so as a single action with the concentrate and manipulate traits instead of 
taking an hour. If you have the formula for the item you are attempting to identify, you gain 
a +2 circumstance bonus to your check and treat any critical failures as failures instead.
FAR LOBBER FEAT 1
 You've learned techniques to improve your distance throwing. When 
you throw an alchemical bomb, it has a range increment of 30 feet instead of the 
usual 20 feet. 
QUICK BOMBER FEAT 1
 You place your bombs in easy-to-reach pouches and learn how to draw them 
almost without thinking. When you use the Interact action (see page 307) to draw an 
alchemical item with the bomb trait, you can draw two bombs instead. When using Quick 
Alchemy to create a bomb, you can also draw one other bomb as part of the Quick 
Alchemy action. 
SMOKE BOMB FEAT 1
 Frequency 
once per round
Trigger
 You craft an alchemical bomb using the Quick Alchemy action.
You cause the bomb to create a cloud of thick smoke in addition to its normal effects. 
When thrown, it creates a cloud of smoke in a 10-foot-radius burst. You choose which 
corner of target's space (or the space in which the bomb lands) the cloud is centered on. 
All creatures within that area are concealed (see page 302). The smoke lasts for 1 minute 
or until dissipated with a strong wind. 
4TH LEVEL
CALCULATED SPLASH FEAT 4
 You can calculate the angle that maximizes the damage of a bomb's splash. 
When you throw an alchemical item of 3rd level or higher with the bomb and splash 
traits, you can choose for the bomb's splash damage to deal extra damage equal to your 
Intelligence modifier (minimum 0) instead of the normal amount. 
EFFICIENT ALCHEMY FEAT 4
 Because of the great amount of time you've spent studying and 
experimenting, you know how to scale up your formulas to larger batches without 
giving them any additional attention. When spending downtime to Craft alchemical 
items, you can produce twice the number of alchemical items in a single batch without 
needing to spend additional preparatory time. For instance, if you are crafting elixirs of 
life, you can craft up to four elixirs in a single batch using downtime, rather than two. 
This does not reduce the amount of required alchemical reagents or other ingredients 
49
needed to craft each item, nor does it increase your rate of 
progress for days past the base downtime spent. This also does 
not change the number of items you can create in a batch with 
advanced alchemy. 
ENDURING ALCHEMY FEAT 4
 When using Quick Alchemy to create an alchemical 
tool or elixir, you can enable that tool or elixir to remain potent 
until the end of your next turn, instead of losing its potency at 
the start of your next turn.
POISON RESISTANCE FEAT 4
 You gain poison resistance equal to half your level, 
and a +1 conditional bonus to saving throws against poisons. 
6TH LEVEL
 DEBILITATING BOMB FEAT 6
 Frequency
 once per round
Trigger
 You craft an alchemical item that has the 
elixir trait using the Quick Alchemy action. You mix a substance into the bomb that can cause one of the 
following conditions: dazzled, deafened, flat-footed, or hampered 
5. If the attack with that bomb hits, the target must succeed at 
a Fortitude saving throw or gain that condition until the start of 
your next turn. Use your class DC for this saving throw (even if 
someone else throws the bomb).
DELAYED BOMB FEAT 6
 When using Quick Alchemy to craft an 
alchemical item with the bomb trait, you can build it to explode 
automatically after a certain amount of time. This delay can be 
any number of rounds up to your level, chosen when you craft 
the bomb. When this delayed bomb explodes, it deals damage 
to a creature within its square as if that creature had been hit 
by an attack with the bomb (if there are multiple creatures in 
the square, choose the target randomly). It also deals its splash 
damage (if any) as if you had thrown the bomb at the target.
Unlike other items crafted with the Quick Alchemy action, 
the delayed bomb remains potent until it explodes or you 
defuse it. You can use the Interact action with a delayed bomb 
you made in order to defuse it. Other creatures can try to 
Disable a Device to defuse the bomb, using your class DC for 
the Thievery check.
FAST ONSET FEAT 6
 When you drink one of your alchemical item that 
has the elixir and infused traits and an onset time of 1 minute, treat the item's onset as the end of your next turn instead. When you drink one of your infused elixirs with an onset time that's 
normally the end of your next turn, the elixir instead has no 
onset time and takes effect immediately.
POISON ANTIDOTE FEAT 6
 Prerequisites 
Poison Resistance
You can use Quick Alchemy to create a specific antidote to 
single specific poison or venom you have identified. When 
imbibed or injected as an Operate Activation action, this specific 
antidote attempts to counteract that poison or venom using 
a counteract level equal to half your level rounded up. If you 
use the specific antidote on yourself and you have the formula 
for the poison or venom affecting you, increase the counteract 
level of the specific antidote by 1. For more about counteracting 
poisons, see page 319.
PRECISE BOMBS FEAT 6
 When throwing an alchemical bomb with the splash 
trait, the splash damage does not affect your allies. You must be 
able to perceive an ally to exclude that ally from your bomb's 
splash damage.
8TH LEVEL
 COMBINE ELIXIRS FEAT 8
 Frequency
 once per round
Trigger
 You craft an alchemical item that has the 
elixir trait using the Quick Alchemy action. You've discovered how to mix two elixirs into a single concoction 
for quicker consumption. You can spend 3 Resonance Points 
instead of 1 Resonance Point to add a second elixir to the one 
you're crafting. When this combination elixir is consumed, both 
the constituent elixirs take effect. For example, you can combine 
two of the same elixirs to create a combined elixir of life that 
heals double the amount. If a creature other than you drinks a 
combined elixir, it must spend 2 Resonance Points to gain the 
effects instead of only 1 Resonance Point. 
FERAL MUTAGEN FEAT 8
 Your feral mutagen truly brings out the beast 
lurking within you. Whenever you're affected by a feral mutagen, 
you gain the mutagen's item bonus to your Intimidation checks. 
You also gain two new unarmed Strikes: one with your claws 
and one with your jaws. Your claws and jaws both have the agile 
weapon trait. Your claws deal slashing damage equal to 1d6 plus 
your Strength modifier (plus the extra dice from your mutagen), 
while your jaws deal piercing damage equal to 1d8 plus your 
Strength modifier (plus the extra dice from your mutagen). 
POWERFUL ALCHEMY FEAT 8
 When you use Quick Alchemy to create an infused 
alchemical item that allows a saving throw, you can change its 
DC to your class DC.
STRONG MEDICINE FEAT 8
 When you use Quick Alchemy to create any type 
of elixir of life, the creature drinking the elixir gains both its 
healing effect and any effect the elixir grants against toxins, 
even if the drinker was not at full Hit Points when consuming 
the elixir.
TRICKY TINKER FEAT 8
 Deception and Thievery become signature skills 
50
for you. When you Disable Device, you can use alchemist's tools 
or a repair kit instead of thieves' tools (see pages 184 and 187). 
10TH LEVEL
EXPANDED SPLASH FEAT 10
Prerequisites 
Calculated Splash
When you throw an alchemical bomb with the splash trait that 
you have created, the splash damage is increased to 2 plus your 
Intelligence modifier, and it damages every creature within 
10 feet of the target. 
GREATER DEBILITATING BOMB FEAT 10
Prerequisites 
Debilitating Bomb
When you use the Debilitating Bomb free action, add the 
following conditions to the list you can choose from: enfeebled 1, 
hampered 10, sluggish 1, or stupefied 1.
POTENT POISONER FEAT 10
Prerequisites 
Powerful Alchemy
When you craft an alchemical item with the poison trait using any 
means, the DC is increased by 2, to a maximum of your class DC.
REVIVIFYING MUTAGEN FEAT 10
While under the effect of a mutagen, you can 
metabolize that mutagen's power to heal yourself. This takes an 
action with the concentrate and manipulate trait. Once the action 
is complete, you regain 1d6 Hit Points for every 2 item levels of 
the mutagen, but the mutagen's duration immediately ends, even 
if you are under the effect of Persistent Mutagen.
STALKER MUTAGEN FEAT 10
Stealth becomes a signature skill for you. When 
you are under the effects of a quicksilver mutagen (see 
page 367), you can move up to your Speed when you Sneak.
STICKY BOMB FEAT 10
Frequency 
once per round
Trigger
 You craft an alchemical elixir using the 
Quick Alchemy action. You mix in an additive to make the bomb's contents adhere to the 
target and continue to deal damage. A creature that takes a direct 
hit from one of your sticky bombs also takes persistent damage 
equal to and of the same type as the bomb's splash damage. 
12TH LEVEL
EXTEND ELIXIR FEAT 12
When you drink an elixir you created that has the 
infused traits and a duration of 1 minute or longer, the elixir's 
duration is doubled.
INVINCIBLE MUTAGEN FEAT 12
Whenever you're affected by a juggernaut mutagen 
(see page 365), you gain resistance to all physical damage equal 
to the mutagen's item bonus.
SAFETY FEAT 12
Prerequisites
 expert in Fortitude or Reflex saves
Dozens of accidents have given you experience in avoiding the 
hazards of the laboratory. You gain the proficiency rank of master 
in either Fortitude or Reflex (you must choose which saving 
throw will be affected when you take this feat, and you cannot 
change this decision later). When you succeed at a saving throw 
of your chosen type, treat the outcome as a critical success. You 
must have a proficiency rank of at least expert in a saving throw 
for it to benefit from this feat.
POISON TOUCH FEAT 12
Prerequisites 
Potent Poisoner
You can spend 1 Resonance Point to apply a dose of contact or 
injury potion of your level or lower to your hands. Applying the 
poison does not poison you, but after the poison is applied, you 
can make a melee touch attack with your hand or a fist attack 
to poison your target. On a success, the poison is applied to the 
target. On a failure, the poison is wasted.
If you don't use the poison before 1 hour after applying it, your 
body harmlessly absorbs the poison and it is wasted. 
UNCANNY BOMBS FEAT 12
Prerequisites 
Far Lobber, Precise Bombs
When you throw an alchemical item with the bomb trait, its 
range increment increases to 60 feet, you take no penalty for 
screening (see page 314), and you automatically succeed at the 
flat check when targeting a concealed creature. 
14TH LEVEL
AWAKENED INTELLECT FEAT 14
Nature and Religion become signature skills for 
you, and you gain a +2 circumstance bonus when using Nature 
or Religion to Recall Knowledge.
DOUBLE MUTAGEN FEAT 14
If you imbibe another mutagen while under the 
effects of a mutagen you created using the mutagen crafting 
class feature, you can gain the benefits and the drawbacks of 
both mutagens at once, despite the fact that they both have the 
polymorph trait. If you come under the effects of any further mutagens 
while benefiting from two mutagens in this way, you lose the 
benefit of one of the former mutagens of your choice, while 
retaining the drawbacks of all mutagens. If you are under the 
effects of multiple mutagens and you come under the effect of 
a nonmutagen polymorph effect, you lose the benefits of the 
mutagens while retaining the drawbacks of both.
GLIB MUTAGEN FEAT 14
When affected by a silvertongue mutagen (see 
page 368), you ignore circumstance penalties to Deception, 
Diplomacy, Intimidation, and Performance checks, and your 
words transcend linguistic barriers such that those listening to 
you speak hear your words as if you were speaking in their own 
51
language (though you do not actually speak that language, nor 
does this ability allow you understand any additional languages). 
TRUE DEBILITATING BOMB FEAT 14
Prerequisites 
Greater Debilitating Bomb
When you use the Debilitating Bomb free action, add the 
following to the list of conditions you can choose from: 
enfeebled 2, hampered 15, or stupefied 2. If you instead apply 
one of the conditions listed in Debilitating Bomb, the target 
avoids the condition only if its save is a critical success.
16TH LEVEL
ETERNAL ELIXIR FEAT 16
Prerequisites 
Extend Elixir
When you drink one of your alchemical items that has the elixir 
and infused traits and a duration of 1 minute or more, you can 
make the elixir's duration permanent. You can do so only if the 
elixir's level is half your level or lower. If you later consume a 
diffierent elixir and make it permanent, the effect of the previous 
permanent elixir ends.  
EXPLOITIVE BOMB FEAT 16
Frequency
 once per round
Trigger
 You craft an alchemical bomb using the Quick Alchemy 
action. You mix a substance into the bomb to foil resistances. The bomb 
treats any resistance to its energy type as if it were 15 lower.
GENIUS MUTAGEN FEAT 16
When you're affected by a cognitive mutagen (see 
page 363), you also gain the mutagen's item bonus to Deception, 
Diplomacy, Intimidation, Medicine, Nature, Performance, Religion, 
and Survival checks, and you can communicate telepathically 
with all creatures within 60 feet who share a language with 
you. The communication is two-way once you establish it, so a 
creature you contact can also communicate with you. 
PERFECT MEDICINE FEAT 16
When you use Quick Alchemy to create any type 
of elixir of life, the creature drinking the elixir does not need to 
roll the number of Hit Points regained by the elixir. It gains the 
maximum number of Hit Points possible instead.
PERSISTENT MUTAGEN FEAT 16
Prerequisites 
Extend Elixir
Once per day when you drink an alchemical item with the 
infused and mutagen trait that you have crafted, you can retain 
its effects until the next time you make your daily preparations 
instead of its normal duration.
18TH LEVEL
IMPROBABLE ELIXIRS FEAT 18
Select a number of potions (see page 378) equal 
to your Intelligence modifier (minimum 1) of 10th level or lower. 
You gain formulas to Craft these potions as alchemical items 
with the elixir trait. When Crafting these alchemical elixirs, you 
can substitute alchemical reagents for an equal value of magical 
components, and you can use alchemist tools instead of any other 
required tool kits. Other than that, the formula does not change. 
Once you've chosen the potion formulas, they can't be
 changed. 
MINDBLANK MUTAGEN FEAT 18
When you're affected by a bullheaded mutagen 
(see page 362), you gain immunity to detection, revelation, and 
scrying effects of 9th level or lower. 
MIRACLE WORKER FEAT 18
You can administer a true elixir of life to a creature 
who has been dead for 1 minute or less. When you do, that 
creature is immediately returned to life with 1 Hit Point and no 
Resonance Points.
PERFECT DEBILITATION FEAT 18
When you use the Debilitating Bomb free action, 
your target avoids the condition the bomb imposes only if its 
saving throw is a critical success.
20TH LEVEL
CRAFT PHILOSOPHER'S STONE FEAT 20
You gain the formula for the philosopher's stone 
(see page 367) and can add it to your formula book.
PERFECT MUTAGEN FEAT 20
When under the effect of a mutagen you crafted, 
you do not suffier its drawback.
POISON PANACEA FEAT 20
Prerequisites 
Poison Antidote
You direct a potent panacea through your body to wipe out 
poison within you. You attempt to counteract the lowest-level 
poison affecting you, with a counteract level of 9.
UNIVERSAL EMPOWERMENT FEAT 20
Your connection to alchemy is so strong that you 
have a connection to all alchemical items, no matter who devised 
them. Whenever you use any alchemical item with the bomb trait, 
it responds to you as if it were infused and you were the one who 
created it. Whenever you use any mutagen, you also treat it as if it 
were infused and attuned to you.
SAMPLE FORMULA BOOK
You can choose whichever 1st-level common alchemical 
items you like for your formula book, but this list covers a 
good selection of starter formulas. 
Alchemical Item Formulas:
 Acid flask, alchemist's fire, 
antidote (level 1), antiplague (level 1) minor elixir of life, 
cheetah's elixir, tanglefoot bag, smokestick.
52 
Rage consumes you in battle. You delight in carving through your enemies 
using powerful weapons and wreaking havoc, relying on astonishing 
durability, without needing complicated techniques or rigid training. 
You associate your rage with a traditional symbol of affinity known 
as a totem, which might take the form of an animal, a spirit, or a part 
of yourself. To many barbarians, brute force is a hammer and every 
problem looks like a nail, whereas others try to hold back the dark 
emotions inside them and release them only when it matters most.
BARBARIAN
53 
KEY ABILITY
Strength
HIT POINTS
12 plus your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
PERCEPTION
 Expert
SAVING THROWS
Expert in Fortitude
Trained in Reflex
Expert in Will
SKILLS
Trained in a number of skills equal to 
 3 plus your Intelligence modifier.
WEAPONS
Trained in all simple and martial weapons
ARMOR
Trained in light and medium armor
SIGNATURE SKILLS
Acrobatics
Athletics
Intimidation
PLAYING A BARBARIAN
Players of barbarian characters might approach gameplay in the following ways.

Ł During combat, you Rage and then rush to the front lines to smash your way through. 
Ofiense is the best defense, since you'll need to drop your foes before they can exploit 
your relatively low defenses. Your anger-fueled fury burns out quickly, so you might 
spend a round waiting until you can Rage again. 

Ł During social encounters, you use intimidation to get what you need, especially 
when gentler forms of persuasion can't get the job done.

Ł In exploration mode, you look out for danger while remaining ready to rush headfirst 
into battle in an instant. You climb the challenging rock wall and drop a rope for the 
others to follow, and you wade into the risky currents to reach the hidden switch 
beneath the water's surface. And if something needs breaking, you're up to the task!

Ł In downtime mode, you might head to a tavern to carouse, build up the fearsome legend 
of your mighty deeds, or recruit followers to become a warlord in your own right.
ROLEPLAYING A BARBARIAN
Barbarians are powerful, deeply emotional, and bold. IF YOU'RE A BARBARIAN, YOU LIKELY...

Ł Have a deep-seated well of anger, hatred, or frustration.

Ł Prefer a straightforward approach to one requiring patience and tedium.

Ł Engage in a regimen of intense physical fitness—and punch anyone who says this 
conflicts with your distaste for patience and tedium.
OTHERS PROBABLY...

Ł Think you're an uncivilized savage, or at least a boorish lout unfit for high society.

Ł Never doubt your courage.

Ł Believe you have bizarre superstitions and poor education and might be illiterate.

Ł Expect you to have no restraint or control of your temper, so they walk on eggshells 
around you and gripe about you behind your back.
CLASS FEATURES
You gain these abilities as a barbarian. Abilities gained at higher levels list the 
requisite levels next to the features' names. RAGE
Barbarians can fiy into a dangerous battle rage. You gain the Rage action.
 RAGE
Requirements
 You can't be fatigued, raging, or wearing heavy armor.
You begin raging. You gain a number of temporary Hit Points equal to your 
level plus your Constitution modifier and enter a state of pure rage that 
lasts for 3 rounds. While you are raging, you are afiected in these ways:

Ł Gain a +2 conditional bonus to damage rolls with melee weapons and unarmed 
Strikes. The bonus is halved if your weapon or unarmed Strike is agile. This bonus 
increases by 1 at level 3 and every 4 levels thereafter.

Ł Take a –1 penalty to AC.

Ł You can't use actions that have the concentrate trait unless they also have the rage 
trait. The Seek basic action gains the rage trait while you're raging.
After you have stopped raging, you lose any remaining temporary Hit Points from 
using the Rage action, you can't use Rage again for 1 round, and you are fatigued for 
1 round. You can't voluntarily stop raging. If you stop raging before its usual duration 
expires, you are fatigued and can't Rage again until after the end of your next turn.
TOTEM
You associate your rage with a traditional symbol called a totem. Your
 totem 
BarbarianConcentrate
EmotionMental54 TABLE 3–2: BARBARIAN ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level
Class Features
1 Ancestry feat, background, barbarian feat, initial 
proficiencies, rage, totem
2 Barbarian feat, skill feat
3 Critical brutality, general feat, skill increase
4 Barbarian feat, skill feat 
5 Ability boosts, ancestry feat, deny advantage, skill 
increase
6 Barbarian feat, skill feat
7 General feat, juggernaut, skill increase
8 Barbarian feat, skill feat
9 Ancestry feat, raging resistance, skill increase
10 Ability boosts, barbarian feat, skill feat
11 General feat, mighty rage, skill increase
12 Barbarian feat, skill feat
13 Ancestry feat, improved juggernaut, skill increase, 
weapon fury
14 Barbarian feat, skill feat
15 Ability boosts, general feat, indomitable will, skill 
increase
16 Barbarian feat, skill feat
17 Ancestry feat, skill increase, tireless rage
18 Barbarian feat, skill feat
19 Devastating strikes, general feat, skill increase
20 Ability boosts, barbarian feat, skill feat
gives you an ability, requires you to avoid certain 
behaviors, gives you resistances at higher levels, and 
allows you to select feats tied to your totem. For more 
information, see Totems on page 55.
BARBARIAN FEATSAt 1st level and every even-numbered level thereafter, 
you gain a barbarian class feat. Barbarian class feats are 
described beginning on page 57.SKILL FEATS 2ND
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill 
feat. Skill feats appear in Chapter 5 and have the skill trait. 
You must be trained or better in the corresponding skill to 
select a skill feat. CRITICAL BRUTALITY
 3RD
While you are raging, you gain access to the critical 
specialization effect for any melee weapon or unarmed 
attack you have (see page 183).GENERAL FEATS 3RD
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a 
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.SKILL INCREASES 3RD
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a 
skill increase. You can use this increase to either become 
trained in one skill you're untrained in, or become an 
expert in one skill in which you're already trained. If you are at least 7th level, you can use this increase 
to become a master in a signature skill in which you're 
already an expert. If you are at least 15th level, you can 
use this increase to become legendary in a signature skill 
in which you're already a master.
DENY ADVANTAGE
 5TH
 You are not treated as flat-footed by creatures of your 
level or lower that are fianking you, though such creatures 
can still provide a fiank to their allies. Also, you are no 
longer flat-footed against attacks from sensed or unseen 
creatures of your level or lower.
ABILITY BOOSTS 5TH
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four 
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to 
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability 
score increases it by 1 if it's already 18 or above, or by 2 if 
it starts out below 18.ANCESTRY FEATS 5TH
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain 
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter. 
The list of ancestry feats available to you can be found in 
your ancestry's entry in Chapter 2.
JUGGERNAUT 7TH
You become a master at Fortitude saves. When you 
succeed at a Fortitude save, treat it as a critical success. RAGING RESISTANCE
 9TH
You gain resistance equal to your Constitution modifier 
(minimum 0) to two damage types based on your totem. MIGHTY RAGE
 11TH
At 11th level, you gain the Mighty Rage free action. MIGHTY RAGE
Trigger 
You use the Rage action.
Use one of your actions that has the rage trait.
IMPROVED JUGGERNAUT 13THYou become legendary at Fortitude saves. When you 
critically fail a Fortitude save, treat it as a failure. When 
you fail a Fortitude save against an effect that deals 
damage, you halve the damage you take. WEAPON FURY 13TH
Your proficiency rank for simple weapons, martial 
weapons, and unarmed attacks increases to expert. INDOMITABLE WILL 15TH
Your rage fllls your mind and heart with incredible 
strength, making it incredibly difficult to control you. You 
Barbarian55 TABLE 3–3: ANIMAL TOTEMS
AnimalAttack
DamageTraits
ApeFist  1d10 BUnarmedBearJaws
Claw
1d10 P1d6 SUnarmedAgile, unarmedBullHorn1d10 P UnarmedCat
Jaws
Claw 
1d10 P1d8 S UnarmedAgile, unarmedDeerAntler1d10 P UnarmedFrog
Jaws
1d10 B  UnarmedSharkJaws
1d10 P  UnarmedSnakeFangs 
1d10 P  UnarmedWolf
Jaws
1d10 P UnarmedTABLE 3–4: DRAGON TOTEMS
DragonType
Breath Weapon
BlackChromatic 
Line of acidBlueChromatic 
Line of electricityGreen
Chromatic 
Cone of poisonRed
Chromatic 
Cone of fire
WhiteChromatic 
Cone of coldBrassMetallic Line of fire
Bronze
Metallic Line of electricityCopperMetallic Line of acidGoldMetallic Cone of fire
Silver
Metallic Cone of coldbecome a master at Will saves. When you succeed at a 
Will save, treat it as a critical success.
TIRELESS RAGE 17TH
You don't become fatigued after you stop raging. It still takes 
the normal amount of time before you can use Rage again. DEVASTATING STRIKES 19TH
Your Strikes are so devastating that you hardly care 
about wielding the best weapon against each monster. 
If you succeed at a melee Strike against a creature with 
resistance against the physical damage type of the weapon 
or unarmed attack you're using, reduce that resistance by 
twice your Constitution modifier (minimum 0).TOTEMS
As a barbarian, you channel the power of your rage through a totem. Traditionally, this is a spiritual or tribal 
symbol, but you choose what your totem means to you; it might describe a purely internal source or fllter of your rage, such as a belief, curse, exotic heritage, or state of mind. Each totem grants you a totem ability, plus more 
abilities you can gain via totem feats, and it determines what types of damage you resist with the raging resistance class feature. Each totem lists acts that are anathema to it. 
Whenever you perform such acts, you lose the totem's 
power and any totem feats until you spend 1 day of 
downtime recentering yourself, though you keep all 
other barbarian abilities. 
ANIMAL TOTEM
The fury of a wild predator fllls you when you Rage, 
granting you uncanny unarmed attacks. Tribes that 
revere vicious animals (such as apes or bears) give rise to 
barbarians of this totem. You might also be at war with 
an uncontrollable, animalistic side of your personality, 
or you might be a descendant of a werewolf or other 
lycanthrope. Select an animal from Table 3–3: Animal 
Totems that best matches your chosen animal totem.
AnathemaWielding weapons or fiagrantly disrespecting any animal 
of your totem animal's kind are anathema to your totem.
Bestial Rage (Totem Ability)
When you Rage, you gain your chosen animal's unarmed 
attack (or attacks). The speciflc attack gained, the damage 
it deals, and its traits are listed on the Animal Totems 
table. All of these unarmed attacks are in the brawling 
group. Your Rage action gains the morph, primal, and 
transmutation traits. Raging ResistanceThe resistance from your raging resistance class feature 
applies against piercing and slashing damage. DRAGON TOTEM
You become as wrathful as a mighty dragon and manifest 
incredible abilities. Perhaps your culture reveres draconic 
majesty, teaching its warriors techniques that echo draconic 
fury, or you gained a connection to your totem after 
drinking or bathing in dragon's blood or after watching 
your village burn at the wrath of a marauding wyrm. Select 
a type of true dragon from Table 3–4: Dragon Totems to be 
your totem's chosen dragon. Chromatic dragons tend to be 
evil and metallic dragons tend to be good. AnathemaDefying a dragon of your chosen type or letting a personal 
insult against you slide is anathema to your totem. Draconic Rage (Totem Ability)
When you are raging, you can make your conditional bonus 
to damage deal the type of damage of your chosen dragon's 
breath weapon, rather than your weapon or unarmed 
attack's usual damage type, which increases the damage 
by 1 (after halving for agile weapons, if applicable). If you 
do this, your Rage action gains the arcane and evocation 
traits, as well as the trait matching the damage type. Raging ResistanceThe resistance from your raging resistance class feature 
applies against piercing damage and the damage type of 
your chosen dragon's breath weapon.
56 FURY TOTEM
Your rage comes from a deep well within you, rather than 
from an external source. You use your rage as you choose. 
Anathema and Totem Ability
You don't have an anathema or totem ability. Instead, you 
gain an additional 1st-level barbarian feat. Raging ResistanceThe resistance from your raging resistance class feature 
applies against all physical weapon damage. GIANT TOTEM
Giants are towering, exceptionally strong humanoids, and some tribes aspire to be like them. Your rage gives 
you the raw power and size of a giant. This doesn't mean 
you revere giants—you might scoff at them, or even aspire to slay them! It could be that you seem to other people like a giant due to your exceptional strength or larger-than-life emotions and ego.
AnathemaFailing to accept a personal challenge of your strength is 
anathema to your totem. Titan Mauler (Totem Ability)
You can use a weapon built for a Large creature if you 
are Small or Medium (both normally and when raging). If 
you're not Small or Medium, you can use a weapon built 
for a creature one size larger than you. You also gain access 
to your choice of weapon at character creation. When 
you are wielding such a weapon in combat, double your 
conditional bonus to damage rolls from raging, but you 
have the sluggish 1 condition (see page 324) because of 
the weapon's unwieldy size. You can't remove this sluggish 
condition or ignore its penalties by any means while you're 
wielding the weapon. 
Raging ResistanceThe resistance from your raging resistance class feature 
applies against bludgeoning damage and your choice of 
cold, electricity, or fire damage. Choose the damage type 
when you gain the raging resistance class feature (though 
you can retrain it later).SPIRIT TOTEM
Whether you are emotionally sensitive to the activity 
of spirits around you, belong to a shamanic tribe that 
worships ancestors or apparitions, or are haunted by a 
specter of an ancestor, relative, friend, or foe, your rage 
takes the form of a spiritual possession. AnathemaDisrespecting corpses or spirits that are in your presence 
is anathema to your totem; however, defending yourself 
against undead creatures is not. Spirit Rage (Totem Ability)
When you are raging, you can make your conditional 
bonus to damage deal negative or positive damage, rather 
than your weapon or unarmed attack's usual damage 
type (you choose which type each time you Rage). If 
you choose to do this, your weapon or unarmed attack 
affects material and incorporeal creatures and objects 
equally. This makes your weapon overcome incorporeal 
creatures' resistance to physical attacks (as the ghost 
touch property rune). If you choose to deal negative or 
positive damage, your Rage action gains the divine and 
necromancy traits, plus the negative or positive trait, 
as appropriate. Raging ResistanceThe resistance from your raging resistance class feature 
applies against negative damage, as well as all damage 
dealt by the attacks and abilities of undead creatures, 
regardless of the damage type. SUPERSTITION TOTEM
A deep distrust of magic drives you to forgo the 
metaphysical nonsense of spellcasters. Whether you're 
a member of a superstitious tribe that distrusts magic, 
a survivor of a magical accident that left your mind and 
body with an intense aversion to magic, or a scion of a 
bloodline known for its magic resistance, your rage is 
inimical to magic. This makes you an excellent mage 
hunter but slow to trust practitioners of magical arts. 
Your extremely restrictive anathema grants you powers 
beyond those of other totems. AnathemaWillingly accepting the effects of magic spells (including 
from scrolls, wands, and the like), even from your allies, 
is anathema to your totem. You can still drink potions, 
and you can still invest and activate most magic items you 
find, though items that cast spells are subject to the same 
restrictions as all other spells. If an ally insists on using 
magic on you despite your unwillingness, and you have 
no reason to believe they will stop, continuing to travel 
with that ally counts as willingly accepting their spells (as 
do similar circumstances) and thus is also anathema to 
your totem. Superstitious Resistance (Totem Ability)
While raging, you gain a +2 conditional bonus to all saves 
against magic. Raging ResistanceChoose two associated magical traditions: arcane and 
occult, arcane and primal, divine and occult, or divine and 
primal. The resistance from your raging resistance class 
feature applies against all damage you take from spells 
of these two traditions of magic, regardless of the type of 
damage dealt by the spell.57 BARBARIAN FEATS
At every level that you gain a barbarian feat, you can select one of the following 
feats. You must satisfy any prerequisites before selecting the feat.
1ST LEVEL
ACUTE VISION FEAT 1
 When you are raging, your visual senses improve, granting you low-light 
vision and darkvision. RAGING INTIMIDATION FEAT 1
 While you are raging, any Demoralize action you use gains the rage trait. As 
soon as you meet the appropriate prerequisites of the skill feats Intimidating Glare and Scare 
to Death, you gain these feats. Scare to Death also gains the rage trait while you Rage.
 MOMENT OF CLARITY FEAT 1
 You concentrate deeply, pushing back your rage for a moment. Use an 
action with the concentrate trait of your choice, even if it isn't an action 
with the rage trait. You can add an additional action to Moment of Clarity 
to instead use a 2-action activity with the concentrate trait.   
 SUDDEN CHARGE FEAT 1
 Requirements 
You are not wearing heavy armor.
With a quick sprint, you dash up to your foe and swing. Stride up to double your Speed. If 
you end the move within melee reach of at least one enemy, you can make a melee Strike 
against that enemy. You can use Sudden Charge while Burrowing, Climbing, Flying, or 
Swimming instead of Striding if you have the corresponding movement type.
2ND LEVEL
ACUTE SCENT FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 darkvision, low-light vision
When you Rage, your olfactory senses improve. You gain scent (see page 302) with a 
range of 10 feet. INTERNAL FORTITUDE FEAT 2
 You bury your disgust to overcome your queasiness. When you attempt a Fortitude save 
to recover from being sick, you reduce your sick condition by 1 on a failure (but not on a 
critical failure), 2 on a success, or 3 on a critical success.
 NO ESCAPE FEAT 2
 Trigger
 An adjacent foe attempts to move away from you using an action 
that has the move trait.
Stride up to your Speed in tandem with the foe, following the foe's path and remaining adjacent 
to the foe throughout its movement until the foe stops moving or you are out of movement.
 RAGING COURAGE FEAT 2
 You concentrate on the power of your rage, overcoming your fear. When 
you Rage, reduce your frightened condition by 1.
4TH LEVEL
FAST MOVEMENT FEAT 4
 Requirements 
You aren't wearing heavy armor.
While you are raging, you are accelerated 10 (see page 320).
BarbarianBarbarianBarbarianConcentrate
RageBarbarianBarbarianBarbarianRageBarbarianConcentrate
RageBarbarianBARBARIAN FEATS
If you need to look up a barbarian feat by 
name instead of by level, use this table.
Feat
Level
Acute Scent
2 Acute Vision
1 Animal Rage8 Animal Skin6 Awesome Blow
14 Brutal Critical18 Cleave
6 Come and Get Me10 Contagious Rage20 Dragon Totem Breath
6 Dragon Totem Wings
12 Dragon Transformation
16 Fast Movement
4 Furious Sprint10 Giant's Lunge
14 Giant's Stature
6 Great Cleave
10 Internal Fortitude
2 Knockback10 Moment of Clarity1 No Escape2 Perfect Clarity
16 Predator's Pounce
12 Quaking Stomp20 Raging Athlete
4 Raging Courage2 Raging Intimidation
1 Renewed Vigor
8 Spell Sunder12 Spirits' Interference
6 Spirits' Wrath
12 Sudden Charge1 Sudden Leap
8 Sunder Enchantment14 Swipe
4 Terrifying Howl
10 Titan's Stature
12 Vengeful Strike
14 Vicious Evisceration
18 Whirlwind Strike16 Witch Hunter6 KEY TERMSMany barbarian abilities use these terms. Rage: You must be raging to use 
abilities with the rage trait, and they end 
automatically when you stop raging.
Totem:
 Totem abilities require a specific 
totem; you lose access to them when you 
perform acts anathema to your totem.
58 RAGING ATHLETE FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 expert in Athletics
Requirements 
You are not wearing heavy armor.
While you are raging, you gain a climb Speed and swim Speed 
equal to your land Speed.
 SWIPE FEAT 4
 You take a mighty swing against two adjacent 
enemies. Make a melee Strike and compare the attack 
result to the AC of up to two foes, both of whom must be within your 
melee reach and adjacent to each other. Roll damage only once, and 
apply it to each creature you hit. If you critically hit one target and 
not the other, roll the extra critical hit damage separately. A Swipe 
counts as two attacks for your multiple attack penalty.
6TH LEVEL
ANIMAL SKIN FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 animal totemRequirements 
You are not wearing any physical 
armor, though you can be benefiting from 
mage armor or bracers of armor
.When you Rage, your skin transforms into a thick 
hide resembling the skin of your totem animal. As long as you meet 
the requirement, while raging you gain a +1 conditional bonus to 
AC instead of taking a –1 penalty to AC. The thickness of your hide 
gives you a Dexterity modifier cap of +4.
 CLEAVE FEAT 6
 Trigger
 Your melee Strike kills or knocks a creature 
unconscious, and another foe is adjacent to them. Make a melee Strike against the second foe. If you somehow 
Cleave without taking a multiple attack penalty, take a –2 penalty 
to your attack roll instead.
 DRAGON TOTEM BREATH FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 dragon totemFrequency
 once per hourYou breathe in deeply and then exhale powerful 
energy in either a 30-foot cone or a 60-foot line, 
dealing 1d6 damage per barbarian level. Each 
creature in the area must attempt a Reflex save. 
Success That target takes half damage.
Critical Success The target is unafiected. Failure
 The target takes full damage. Critical Failure
 The target takes double damage. Your breath's area (line or cone) and damage type match your chosen 
dragon. This ability counts as a spell of half your level rounded up.
 GIANT'S STATURE FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 giant totemRequirements
 You are Medium or smaller.
You grow to incredible size. You become Large 
and increase your reach by 5 feet until you stop 
raging. You have the sluggish 1 condition (see 
page 324) while your size is increased.
BarbarianBarbarianRageBarbarianMorphPrimalTotem
Transmutation
BarbarianRageArcane
BarbarianConcentrate
Evocation
RageTotem
BarbarianPolymorph
PrimalRageTotem
Transmutation
Your equipment grows with you. If you're using the titan 
mauler ability, your weapon's even larger size causes it to have 
the same effects as normal for that ability.
 SPIRITS' INTERFERENCE FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 spirit totemYou call forth protective spirits to ward ofi ranged 
attacks. While you are raging, anyone making a 
ranged attack against you must succeed at a DC
 5 flat check, or the attack misses with no efiect.
 WITCH HUNTER FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 superstition totemTrigger
 A creature within your reach performs a 
spellcasting action. Make a melee Strike against the triggering creature at a 
–2
 penalty. If the attack hits, you disrupt that action. This Strike 
does not take or count toward your multiple attack penalty.
8TH LEVEL
 ANIMAL RAGE FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 animal totemWhen you Rage, you transform into a Medium 
form of your totem animal, gaining the animal 
trait in addition to your normal traits. All your 
gear is absorbed into your form; all constant 
abilities of your gear still function, but you can't 
activate any item abilities. When you transform, 
you gain the following:
 
Ł Ignore your armor's check penalty and Speed reduction.
 
Ł You gain the same number of temporary Hit Points that you 
normally gain when you are raging

Ł You gain low-light vision
Your animal form prevents you from casting spells, speaking, 
and taking most actions with the manipulate trait that require 
your hands. (The GM determines which manipulate actions you 
can use if there's doubt.) You can dismiss this efiect by spending 
an action (this action has the rage and concentrate traits).
While in animal form, you gain the attacks, movement types, and 
special abilities listed for your chosen animal, and you retain the 
attack or attacks from bestial rage (see Table 3–3: Animal Totems 
on page 55). You choose the specific type of animal you turn into 
within the broader category (such as a lion or snow leopard for 
cat). This has no efiect on your animal form's size or statistics.
Ape Speed of 25 feet, climb Speed of 20 feet; scent. Bear Speed of 25 feet; scent. Bull Speed of 30 feet; scent. Cat
 Speed of 40 feet; scent. Deer Speed of 45 feet; scent. Frog
 tongue (reach 15 feet), 
Damage 1d4 bludgeoning; Speed of 25 feet, swim Speed of 25 feet; scent. Shark swim Speed of 35 feet; scent. Snake Speed of 20 feet, climb Speed of 20 feet, swim Speed of 20 feet; scent. Wolf
 Speed of 40 feet; scent. BarbarianDivineNecromancy
RageTotem
BarbarianRageTotem
BarbarianConcentrate
 Polymorph
PrimalRageTotem
Transmutation
59 RENEWED VIGOR FEAT 8
 You pause to recover some of your raging vigor. 
You gain temporary Hit Points equal to half your 
level plus your Constitution modifier. 
SUDDEN LEAP FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Sudden ChargeRequirements 
You are not wearing heavy armor.
When making a Sudden Charge, instead of Striding, you can 
Leap. If you succeed at an Athletics check when you make the 
Leap, you can move the same distance you could with a Long 
Jump. Even if you're Leaping vertically, you determine the DC for 
the height you're jumping using the DC of a Long Jump.
After your Strike, you fall to the ground if you're in the air. If the 
distance of your fall is no more than the height of your jump, you 
take no damage and land upright.10TH LEVEL
 COME AND GET ME FEAT 10

You open yourself to attacks while 
preparing devastating counterattacks. 
While you are raging, you are flat-
footed, and damage rolls against you gain a 
+2 circumstance bonus. If a creature hits you, that 
creature is flat-footed against the next attack you 
make against it before the end of your next turn. 
If you hit it before the end of your next turn, 
you gain temporary Hit Points equal to 
your Constitution modifier.
  FURIOUS SPRINT FEAT 10

Stride up to four times your Speed in a 
straight line. You can add an additional 
action to Furious Sprint to Stride up to six times your 
Speed in a straight line instead. GREAT CLEAVE FEAT 10

Prerequisites
 Cleave
When you Cleave, if your Strike also kills the 
target or knocks the target unconscious, you can continue 
to make melee Strikes until you make a Strike that doesn't 
kill or knock unconscious a creature or until there are no 
creatures adjacent to the most recent creature you attacked 
while Cleaving, whichever comes first. 
 KNOCKBACK FEAT 10

Requirements 
You use this action immediately 
after you successfully Strike a foe.
You push the foe back 5 feet, as if you had succeeded at an 
Athletics check to Shove the foe.
 TERRIFYING HOWL FEAT 10

Prerequisites
 Intimidating Glare
You unleash a terrifying howl. All frightened 
creatures within 30 feet must succeed at a Will 
BarbarianConcentrate
RageBarbarianBarbarianConcentrate
RageBarbarianRageBarbarianRageBarbarianRageAuditory
BarbarianRagesave against your Intimidation DC. Regardless of the result of its 
saving throw, the creature is bolstered (see page 319) against 
your Terrifying Howl. 
Success The target is unafiected. Failure
 The target gains the fleeing condition for 1 round as 
long as it remains frightened.
Critical Failure
 The gains the fleeing condition as long as it 
remains frightened.
6012TH LEVEL
 DRAGON TOTEM WINGS FEAT 12

Prerequisites
 dragon totemYou sprout dragon wings from your back that are 
the same color as your chosen dragon. While you 
are raging, you gain a fly Speed of 40 feet.
  PREDATOR'S POUNCE FEAT 12

Prerequisites
 animal totemRequirements 
You are not wearing heavy armor.
You close the distance to your prey in a blur, 
pouncing on them before they can react to your sudden 
appearance. You Stride up to your Speed and make a Strike at 
the end of your movement. If you were unseen or sensed before 
you began the action, you remain unseen or sensed until after 
you Strike.
 SPELL SUNDER FEAT 12

Prerequisites
 superstition totemYou draw upon your superstitious fury to destroy 
a spell. Make a Strike with a melee weapon or an 
unarmed attack against a creature, object, or a 
spell manifestation (such as the wall created by 
wall of fire
). Whether or not you succeed at your Strike, the 
target is bolstered to your Spell Sunder.
Success You attempt to counteract a single spell active on 
the target. The counteract attempt uses a level equal to 
half your barbarian level rounded up, if your counteract 
attempt would require a check, your result is the same 
as the result of your attack roll, with any necessary 
adjustments for the difference in counteract level.
 SPIRIT'S WRATH FEAT 12

Prerequisites
 spirit totemYou call forth an ephemeral apparition, typically 
a ghost of an ancestor or nature spirit, which 
takes the form of a wisp. The spirit wisp makes 
a melee slam unarmed Strike against an enemy 
within 25 feet of you. The wisp uses your attack modifier and 
deals damage equal to 4d8 plus your Constitution modifier. 
The damage is your choice of negative or positive damage; 
don't apply your circumstance or conditional bonuses to the 
attack or damage. If your wisp critically hits with this Strike, 
the target gains the frightened 1 condition. This attack takes 
and counts toward your multiple attack penalty as if you 
were the one attacking.
TITAN'S STATURE FEAT 12

Prerequisites
 giant totem, Giant's Stature
You grow to even greater size. When using Giant's 
Stature, you can instead become Huge (increasing 
your reach by 10 feet if you were Medium or 
smaller) while you are raging. You have the sluggish 1 condition 
(see page 324) as long as you are Huge.
BarbarianMorphPrimalRageTotem
Transmutation
BarbarianRageTotem
Attack
BarbarianConcentrate
RageTotem
Attack
BarbarianConcentrate
RageTotem
BarbarianPolymorph
Totem
Transmutation
14TH LEVEL
AWESOME BLOW FEAT 14

Prerequisites
 KnockbackYour attacks are so powerful that they can flatten 
your opponents. When you use Knockback, 
you can attempt an Athletics check against your target's 
Fortitude
 DC. Success You gain the success efiect of a Shove followed by 
the success efiect of a Trip against the target.
Critical Success You gain both the critical success efiect of 
a Shove followed by the critical success efiect of a Trip 
against the target. Failure
 You gain the normal efiect of Knockback.
 GIANT'S LUNGE FEAT 14

Prerequisites
 giant totemYou extend your body and prepare to attack foes 
outside your normal reach. While you are raging, 
you have reach 10 feet on all your melee attacks. 
This doesn't increase the reach of any weapon or unarmed Strike 
that already has reach.
SUNDER ENCHANTMENT FEAT 14

Prerequisites
 superstition totem, Spell SunderWhen you use Spell Sunder, you can instead 
attempt to counteract either an unattended magic item or one of 
your target's magic items. If your counteract attempt succeeds, 
the item becomes a mundane item of its type for 10 minutes. This doesn't change the item's quality. As with Spell Sunder, the 
target is bolstered whether or not you succeed. If you target an 
artifact or other particularly powerful item, then your counteract 
attempt automatically fails. 
 VENGEFUL STRIKE FEAT 14

Prerequisites
 Come and Get MeRequirements 
You're under the efiect of Come and 
Get Me. Trigger
 A creature within your reach succeeds or critically 
succeeds at an attack against you.
When struck by an enemy, you respond in turn. Make a melee 
Strike against the triggering creature at a –2 penalty. This Strike 
doesn't count toward your multiple attack penalty, and your 
multiple attack penalty doesn't apply to this strike.
16TH LEVEL
 DRAGON TRANSFORMATION FEAT 16

Prerequisites
 dragon totem, Dragon Totem Wings
You transform into a Large form of a dragon that 
matches the dragon type of your dragon totem 
until you stop raging, gaining the dragon trait in 
addition to your normal traits while in this form. 
You must have enough space to expand into, or 
your transformation fails. All your gear is absorbed 
into your form; the constant abilities of your gear still function, 
BarbarianConcentrate
RageBarbarianConcentrate
RageTotem
BarbarianTotem
BarbarianRageBarbarianConcentrate
Polymorph
PrimalRageTransmutation
Totem
61but you can't activate any item abilities. When you transform, 
you gain the following.

Ł Ignore your armor's check penalty and Speed reduction, 
if any.

Ł One or more melee unarmed Strikes depending on your 
dragon form (see page 218), which are the only type of 
attacks you can use. You're trained with them. When 
attacking with them, your damage bonus is +6. These are 
Strength-based attacks (for the purposes of the enfeebled 
condition, for example).

Ł Temporary Hit Points equal to the amount you gain when 
you are raging.

Ł Resistance 10 against the damage type of your breath 
weapon.

Ł Blindsense 60 feet, darkvision.
Ł Speed 40 feet and fly Speed 100 feet.
Ł A breath weapon you can activate by spending 2 actions. 
A creature that succeeds at a DC 24 saving throw takes 
half damage, no damage on a critical success, and double damage on a critical failure. The saving throw is a 
Reflex save unless stated otherwise in the special ability 
description. Once you activate your breath weapon, you 
can't use it again for 1d4 rounds. Your breath weapon is an 
arcane evocation efiect with the appropriate damage trait. 
The shape, damage, damage type, and saving throw type 
depend on your dragon form (see page 218).
 After you use 
your breath weapon, you still have to wait the full delay 
even if your transformation ends and you transform anew.
 The special statistics of your dragon form can be adjusted 
only by penalties, circumstance bonuses, and conditional 
bonuses (such as those you gain while raging). Your dragon form 
prevents you from casting spells or taking most actions with the 
manipulate trait that require your hands. (The GM determines 
which actions you can use if there's any doubt.) You can dismiss 
this efiect by spending an action (this action has the rage and 
concentrate traits).
You gain the benefits for your chosen dragon's type listed in 
the dragon form
 spell (see page 218).At 18th level,
 your fly Speed is accelerated 20, your damage 
bonus increases to +12, your breath weapon DC increases to 30, 
and you gain a +14 conditional bonus to breath weapon damage.
 PERFECT CLARITY FEAT 16

Trigger
 You fail or critically fail an attack roll or 
Will save while you are raging.
You burn out all of your rage to ensure that your 
attack lands and your mind remains free. Reroll the 
triggering attack roll or Will save, use the best result, and resolve 
the efiect. You then immediately stop raging.
 WHIRLWIND STRIKE FEAT 16

You attack all foes within your reach. Make melee 
Strikes against all enemies within your melee 
reach. Each attack counts toward your multiple attack penalty, 
but you do not increase your penalty until you have made all 
your attacks.
BarbarianConcentrate
Fortune
RageBarbarianRage18TH LEVEL
BRUTAL CRITICAL FEAT 18

Your critical hits are particularly devastating. On a 
critical hit, add one extra damage die. This is in addition to any 
extra dice you already gain if the weapon is deadly or fatal. The 
target also takes persistent bleed damage equal to one damage die. VICIOUS EVISCERATION FEAT 18

You make a vicious attack that maims your enemy. 
Make a melee Strike that gains the following 
enhancement (see page 294).Enhancement The target is drained 1.20TH LEVEL
 CONTAGIOUS RAGE FEAT 20

You stoke an ally's fury. While you are raging, one 
willing creature within 30 feet gains the same 
damage bonus and AC penalty that you do while 
you are raging. If the ally wasn't already raging, 
she gains the temporary Hit Points from your Rage action as 
well. The ally can still use actions with the concentrate trait, and 
she doesn't become fatigued when you stop raging.
 QUAKING STOMP FEAT 20

Frequency
 once per minuteYou shake the ground, topple creatures, and 
shatter structures in a 60-foot aura around you.

Ł All squares in the area become difficult terrain. Attack 
rolls and skill checks by creatures on the ground take a 
–2
 circumstance penalty.

Ł Any creature on the ground within the area must attempt 
a Reflex save at the start of its turn to keep its footing and 
avoid falling into fissures that open up in the ground. The 
fissures are 40 feet deep, so anyone who falls in takes 
20 bludgeoning damage. The fissures are permanent, and 
their walls require a DC 15 Athletics check to Climb. You 
automatically succeed at your saving throw to avoid any 
fissures you create.

Ł Any structure or ceiling in the area has a chance to collapse. 
The GM makes a flat check for each structure, determining the 
DC for each (DC 16 for a sturdy structure, DC 14 for an average 
structure and most natural formations, DC 9 for a shoddy 
structure, or higher or lower as the GM sees fit). A collapse 
deals 11d6 bludgeoning damage; any creature caught in a 
collapse must attempt a Reflex save to escape it.
Success Target takes half collapse damage and falls prone.
Critical Success Target takes half collapse damage.
Failure
 Target takes full collapse damage and falls prone.
Critical Failure
 Takes full collapse damage and falls into a fissure.
Your Quaking Stomp might have additional effects in certain 
types of terrain. For instance, a clifi might collapse, causing 
creatures atop it to fall, or a lake might drain as the fissures open 
up below its surface and leave a morass of quicksand. The GM 
determines these additional effects. BarbarianBarbarianConcentrate
RageAuditory
BarbarianRageVisualBarbarianManipulate
Rage62 You are a master of artistry,  a scholar of hidden secrets,  and a 
captivating persuader. Using powerful performances, you influence 
minds and elevate souls to new levels of heroics. You might use your 
powers to become a charismatic leader, or perhaps a counselor, 
manipulator, scholar, scoundrel, or virtuoso. While your versatility 
allows some to consider you a jack-of-all-trades and a beguiling ne'er-
do-well who spends too much time in taverns, it's dangerous to dismiss 
you as a master of none.
BARD63 KEY ABILITYCharismaHIT POINTS8 plus your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
PERCE
PTION
ExpertSAVING THROWS
Trained in Fortitude
Trained in Reflex
Expert in WillSKILLS 
Trained in a number of skills equal to 
7 plus your Intelligence modifier
WEAPONS
Trained in all simple weapons plus the 
longsword, rapier, sap, shortsword, short
-bow, and whip
ARMOR
 
Trained in light armor and in shields
SPELLS
Trained in occult spell rolls and DCs and 
in attack rolls for occult spells
SIGNATURE SKILLS
CraftingDeceptionDiplomacyIntimidation
OccultismPerformance
SocietyPLAYING A BARD
Players of bard characters might approach gameplay in the following ways:
Ł During combat, you use magical performances to alter the odds in your group's 
favor. You can alternate between helpful spells, attacks, and healing as needed. 

Ł During social encounters, you persuade, prevaricate, and threaten with ease.

Ł While exploring, you're a font of knowledge and you perform to assist allies.

Ł In downtime, you can earn money and prestige with your performances, gaining a 
name for yourself and acquiring patrons. You might even found a bardic college of 
your own!
ROLEPLAYING A BARD
Bards know obscure lore, perform skillfully, and have silver tongues.
IF YOU'RE A BARD, YOU LIKELY...

Ł Have a passion for your art so strong you forge a spiritual connection.

Ł Take point when tact and nonviolent solutions are required.

Ł Follow your muse, whether it's a fey creature, a philosophical concept, a psychic 
force, or a deity of art or music, and you follow it to learn secret lore that few 
others have.
OTHERS PROBABLY...

Ł Underestimate you compared to other spellcasters, believing you are little more 
than a foppish minstrel and overlooking the subtle power of your magic.

Ł Relish the opportunity to invite you to social events, either as a performer or a 
guest, but still consider you to be something of a curiosity in their social circles.

Ł Respond favorably to your social charm and abilities but remain suspicious of your 
mental magic. CLASS FEATURES
You gain these abilities as a bard. Abilities gained at higher levels list the 
requisite levels next to the features' names. OCCULT SPELLCASTING
You have the power to cast occult spells using the Cast a Spell activity, and 
you gain access to the Material Casting, Somatic Casting, and Verbal Casting 
actions (see Casting Spells on page 195). Because you're a bard, you can usually play an instrument as part of your Material Casting and Somatic Casting actions, so you usually don't need spell components or another hand 
free. You can usually also play an instrument for your Verbal Casting actions 
rather than speaking. Each day, you can cast up to two 1st-level spells. The number of spells you 
can cast each day are called your spell slots. You must know spells to cast 
them, and you learn them via the spell repertoire class feature. As you increase 
in level as a bard, your number of spells per day and the highest level of spells 
you can cast from spell slots increases, as shown on the Bard Spells per Day table on page 65.Some of your spells require you to attempt a spell roll to see how effective 
they are, or have your enemies roll against your spell DC. Since your key ability 
is Charisma, your spell rolls and spell DCs use your Charisma modifier. See page 
291 for details on calculating your spell rolls and spell DCs. Heightening SpellsWhen you get spell slots of 2nd level and higher, you can heighten lower-
level spells to higher levels. You must learn them at the new level to do so, 
as described on page 192. The spontaneous heightening class feature lets you 
select two spells you can heighten freely.
64 TABLE 3–5: BARD ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level
Class Features
1 Ancestry feat, background, first compositions, initial 
proficiencies, muse, occult spellcasting, spell repertoire
2 Bard feat, skill feat
32nd-level spells, spontaneous heightening, general feat, 
skill increase
4 Bard feat, skill feat
53rd-level spells, ability boosts, ancestry feat, 
skill increase
6 Bard feat, skill feat
74th-level spells, general feat, skill increase
8 Bard feat, skill feat
95th-level spells, ancestry feat, skill increase
10 Bard feat, ability boosts, skill feat
116th-level spells, general feat, skill increase
12 Expert spellcaster, skill feat
137th-level spells, ancestry feat, skill increase
14 Bard feat, skill feat
158th-level spells, ability boosts, general feat, skill increase
16 Master spellcaster, skill feat
179th-level spells, ancestry feat, skill increase
18 Bard feat, skill feat
19 Legendary spellcaster, general feat, skill increase
20 Bard feat, ability boosts, skill feat
Cantrips
Some of your spells are cantrips. A cantrip is a special 
type of spell that doesn't use spell slots. You can cast a 
cantrip at will, any number of times per day. A cantrip 
is always automatically heightened to the highest level 
of spell you can cast as a bard. For example, as a 1st-
level bard, the highest level of spell you can cast is 1st, so your cantrips are 1st-level spells. As a 5th-level bard, the highest level of spell you can cast is 3rd, so your cantrips are 3rd-level spells. SPELL
 REPERTOIRE
At 1st level, you learn one 1st-level occult spell of your 
choice and four occult cantrips of your choice. You 
choose these from the common spells on the occult 
spell list in this book (see page 200) or from other 
occult spells to which you have access. You can cast 
any spell in your spell repertoire by using a spell slot of 
an appropriate spell level. 
You add to this spell repertoire as you increase in level. 
Each time you get a spell slot from Table 3–6, you add a 
spell to your spell repertoire of the same level. So when you reach 2nd level, you select another 1st-level spell; at 
3rd level, you select two 2nd-level spells, and at 4th level 
you select a 2nd-level spell. Though you gain them at the same rate, your spell slots and spell repertoire are separate. If a feat or other ability adds a spell to your spell repertoire, it wouldn't give you 
another spell slot, and vice versa. Swapping Spells in Your Repertoire
As you gain new spells in your repertoire, you might want 
to replace some of the spells you previously learned. Each 
time you level up and learn new spells, you can swap out 
one of your old spells for a different spell of the same level. 
This spell can be a cantrip. You can also swap out spells by 
retraining during downtime (see page 318).FIRST COMPOSITIONSCompositions are a special type of spell that require you to use the Performance skill as a part of their casting. At 1st level, bards gain two types of composition spells: composition cantrips and composition powers (which 
both have the composition trait). You gain the 
inspire courage composition cantrip (see page 233), which boosts your allies' attacks, damage, and defense against fear. 
This is in addition to the cantrips you choose from the 
occult list. Feats can give you more composition cantrips. Unlike other cantrips, you can't swap out compositions 
gained from bard feats at a later level, unless you swap 
out the specific feat via retraining (see page 318). You can also cast a composition power called 
counter performance (see page 212) that protects against auditory and visual effects. You have a pool of Spell Points you can 
spend to cast this spell. Your maximum number of Spell 
Points is equal to your key ability modifier (minimum 0). You regain all your Spell Points during your daily 
preparations. You can cast 
counter performance only by spending 1 Spell Point, not using spell slots. This power is automatically heightened to the highest level of spell you can cast. Some bard feats let you learn more composition powers, and such feats typically increase your pool of Spell Points. MUSESAs a bard, you have a muse that leads you to great 
things, which might be a physical creature, a deity, a 
philosophy, or something more nebulous. While there 
are nearly as many different muses as there are bards, 
muses grant a limited number of different abilities to 
bards based on their theme. Lore: Your muse drives you to uncover the hidden 
secrets of the multiverse. You gain the Bardic Lore feat 
and add true strike to your spell repertoire. Maestro: Your muse inspires you to ever-greater 
heights of performance. You gain the Lingering 
Composition feat and add soothe to your spell repertoire. Polymath: Your muse flits about to almost every skill 
and pursuit. You gain the Versatile Performance feat 
and add summon monster to your spell repertoire. BARD FEATS 2ND
At 2nd level, you gain a bard class feat (see page 66). You gain another at 4th, 6th, 8th, 10th, 14th, 18th, and 
20th levels.65 TABLE 3–6: BARD SPELLS PER DAYYour
Spell Level
Level
1st2nd3rd
4th5th6th7th8th9th12————————23————————332———————433———————5332——————6333——————73332—————83333—————933332————1033333————11333332———12333333———133333332——143333333——1533333332—1633333333—17333333332183333333331933333333320333333333 SKILL FEATS 2ND
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain 
a skill feat. Skill feats can be found in Chapter 5 and have the skill trait. You must be trained or better in the 
corresponding skill to select a skill feat. SPONTANEOUS HEIGHTENING 3RD
You learn to freely heighten some of your spells, even 
if you know only the base version of the spell. During 
your daily preparations (see page 192), you can select 
up to two spells you know. You can cast those spells 
using any applicable higher-level spell slots you have, 
heightening the spell to the level of spell slot used, 
even if you don't ordinarily know the spell at the 
higher level. GENERAL FEATS 3RD
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a 
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.SKILL INCREASES 3RD
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain 
a skill increase. You can use this increase to either 
become trained in one skill you're untrained in, 
or become an expert in one skill in which you're 
already trained. If you are at least 7th level, you can use this increase 
to become a master in a signature skill in which you're 
already an expert. If you are at least 15th level, you can 
use this increase to become legendary in a signature 
skill in which you're already a master.
ABILITY BOOSTS 5TH
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four 
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to 
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability 
score increases it by 1 if it's already 18 or above, or by 2 
if it starts out below 18.ANCESTRY FEATS 5TH
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels 
thereafter. The list of ancestry feats available to you can 
be found in your ancestry's entry in Chapter 2.
EXPERT SPELLCASTER 12TH
Your proficiency rank for spell rolls, spell DCs, and 
attack rolls for occult spells increases to expert. MASTER
 SPELLCASTER
 16TH
Your proficiency rank for spell rolls, spell DCs, and 
attack rolls for occult spells increases to master.
LEGENDARY SPELLCASTER 19TH
Your proficiency rank for spell rolls, spell DCs, and 
attack rolls for occult spells increases to legendary.
66 BARD FEATS
If you need to look up a bard feat by name 
instead of by level, use this table.
Feat
Level
Additional Heightening
8 Allegro
14 Bardic Lore
1 Cantrip Expansion4 Dirge of Doom6 Eclectic Skill8 Esoteric Scholar2 Fatal Aria
20 Harmonize
6 House of Imaginary Walls
10 Inspire Competence
2 Inspire Heroics
8 Lingering Composition1 Loremaster's Recall
2 Melodious Spell8 Mental Prowess
8 Mental Stronghold
14 Soothing Ballad14STeady Spellcasting4 Symphony of the Muse
20 Triple Time
4 Unusual Composition10 Versatile Performance
1 BARD FEATS
At every level that you gain a bard feat, you can select one of the following 
feats. You must satisfy any prerequisites before selecting the feat.
1ST LEVELBARDIC LORE FEAT 1
 Your eclectic studies inform you on just about any topic. You are trained 
in Bardic Lore, a special lore skill that can be used only to Recall Knowledge, but can 
be used to Recall Knowledge on any topic. If you are legendary in Occultism, you 
become an expert in Bardic Lore, but you can't increase your proficiency rank in 
Bardic Lore by any other means.
LINGERING COMPOSITION FEAT 1
 By adding a flourish, you can make your compositions last longer. You 
learn the lingering composition composition power (see page 235), which you can 
cast at a cost of 1 Spell Point. Increase your Spell Point pool by 2.
VERSATILE PERFORMANCE FEAT 1
 In social situations, you can rely on the grandeur of your performances 
rather than ordinary social skills. You can use Performance instead of Diplomacy to 
Make an Impression and instead of Intimidation to Demoralize. You can also use an 
acting performance instead of Deception to Impersonate. 
2ND
 LEVELESOTERIC SCHOLAR FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 Versatile Performance
You keep a book of occult spells similar to a wizard's spellbook. You add all the spells in 
your repertoire to this book for free, and you can add additional occult spells to the book 
by paying the appropriate cost and using your Occultism skill, similarly to how a wizard 
can Learn Arcane Spells and add those spells to his spellbook.
During your daily preparations, choose any one spell from your spellbook. If the spell 
you choose is already in your spell repertoire, you can heighten it with spontaneous 
heightening that day. If it isn't in your repertoire, treat it as though it were in it for that
 day. 
INSPIRE COMPETENCE FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 Lingering CompositionYou learn the 
inspire competence
 composition cantrip (see page 233), which magically 
aids your allies' skill checks.
LOREMASTER'S RECALL FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 Bardic Lore
You can magically unlock more memories, making it more likely you can 
remember something. You learn the 
loremaster's recall 
power (see page 236), which you can 
cast at a cost of 1 Spell Point. Increase your Spell Point pool by 1.
4TH LEVELCANTRIP EXPANSION FEAT 4
 Add two additional cantrips of your choice from the occult spell list to your 
spell repertoire.
STEADY SPELLCASTING FEAT 4
 Your spells are disrupted by reactions (see page 196) only if you take 
damage equal to or greater than double your character level.
Bard
Bard
Bard
Bard
Bard
Bard
Fortune
Bard
Bard
KEY TERMSMany bard abilities use these terms.
Composition: To cast a composition 
cantrip or power, you use a type of 
Performance (see page 154). If the spell 
includes Verbal Casting, you must use an 
auditory performance, and if it includes 
Somatic Casting, you must use a visual 
one. The spell gains all the traits of the 
performance you used. You can cast no 
more than one composition spell each 
turn, and you can have only one active 
at a time. If you cast a new composition 
spell, ongoing effects from your previous 
composition spell end immediately.
Metamagic: Metamagic feats trigger 
when you begin casting a spell and typically 
require you to spend an extra spellcasting 
action to alter the spell's effects. You can't 
use metamagic feats if adding an action 
to the spell would make the spell require 
more actions than you have remaining on 
your turn. Because most metamagic feats 
have the same trigger, you usually can use 
only one metamagic feat per spell.
67 TRIPLE TIME FEAT 4
 You learn the 
triple time composition cantrip (see 
page 266), which makes you and your allies move
 more quickly 
for a round.
6TH LEVELDIRGE OF DOOM FEAT 6
 You learn the 
dirge of doom
 composition cantrip (see page 216), which frightens your enemies.
HARMONIZE FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 Lingering CompositionMagical harmonies maintain your compositions. 
You learn the 
harmonize 
power (see page 229), which you can 
cast at a cost of 1 Spell Point. Increase your Spell Point pool 
by 1.
8TH LEVELADDITIONAL HEIGHTENING FEAT 8
 You can heighten additional spells. During your 
daily preparations, when selecting spells for spontaneous 
heightening, you can select up to four spells, instead of two.
ECLECTIC SKILL FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Versatile Performance, Master Occultism
You can attempt any skill check that normally requires you to 
be trained, even if you are untrained. If you are legendary in 
Occultism, you can also attempt any skill check that normally 
requires you to be an expert, even if you are untrained 
or trained. 
INSPIRE HEROICS FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Lingering CompositionYou learn the 
inspire heroics 
power (see page 233), 
which you can cast at a cost of 1 Spell Point. Increase your Spell 
Point pool by 2.
 MELODIOUS SPELL FEAT 8
 Trigger
 You begin casting a bard spell that has a 
maximum of 2 spellcasting actions. Add a Verbal Casting action to the casting of the triggering 
spell and attempt a Performance check against all observers' 
Perception DCs. If your Performance check is successful against 
an observer's Perception DC, that observer doesn't notice that 
you are casting a spell. This conceals only the spell's spellcasting 
actions, not any of the spell's physical effects, so an observer 
might still see a ray streak out from you or see you disappear if 
you turn invisible.
MENTAL PROWESS FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Expert in Will saves, Bardic Lore
Your proficiency rank for Will saves increases to master. 
When you succeed at a Will save, treat it as a critical 
success instead. Bard
Bard
Bard
MetamagicBard
Bard
Bard
MetamagicBard
MetamagicBard
10TH LEVELHOUSE OF IMAGINARY WALLS FEAT 10

You learn the 
house of imaginary walls
 composition cantrip (see 
page 230). UNUSUAL COMPOSITION FEAT 10

Prerequisites
 Versatile Performance
Trigger
 You begin casting a composition spell that 
has a maximum of 2 spellcasting actions. You use a different kind of performance than usual for the 
composition in order to change any of its Somatic Casting 
actions to Verbal Casting actions or vice versa, and adding an 
additional spellcasting action of the appropriate type. As usual 
for composition spells, this changes whether the composition is auditory or visual.14TH LEVEL
ALLEGRO FEAT 14

You can quicken your allies. You learn the 
allegro 
composition cantrip (see page 204).MENTAL STRONGHOLD FEAT 14

Prerequisites
 Master in Will saves, Bardic Lore
Your mind is a fortress. You become legendary at Will saves. 
When you critically fail a Will save, treat it as a failure instead, 
and when you fail a Will save against an efiect that deals 
damage, halve the damage you take.
SOOTHING BALLAD FEAT 14

You learn the 
soothing ballad composition power 
(see page 257), which you can cast at a cost of 2 Spell Points. 
Increase your Spell Point pool by 2.
20TH LEVEL
FATAL ARIA FEAT 20

You learn the 
fatal aria composition power 
(see page 223), which you can cast at a cost of 2 Spell Points. 
Increase your Spell Point pool by 2.
SYMPHONY OF THE MUSE FEAT 20

Prerequisites
 Harmonize
You are able to weave countless performances together into a 
solo symphony. You are no longer limited to a single composition 
each turn or a single composition at a time; when you use a new 
composition, all previous compositions' effects remain.
Bard
MetamagicBard
Bard
Bard
Bard
Bard
68 Deities work their will upon the world in infinite ways, and you serve 
as one of their most stalwart mortal servants. Blessed with divine magic 
granted through the grace of your deity, you live the ideals of your faith, 
adorn yourself with the symbols of your church, and train diligently to 
wield the weapon favored by your deity. Your spells might protect and 
heal your allies, or they might punish foes and lay waste to enemies of 
your faith, as your deity wills. Yours is a life of devotion, spreading the 
teachings of your faith through both thought and deed.
CLERIC69 KEY ABILITYWisdomHIT POINTS8 plus your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
PERCEPTION
Trained
SAVING THROWSExpert in Fortitude
Trained in Reflex
Expert in WillSKILLS
Trained in a number of skills equal to 
 5 plus your Intelligence modifier
WEAPONS
Trained in all simple weapons and the 
favored weapon of your deity. If your 
deity's favored weapon is uncommon, you 
also gain access to that weapon.
ARMOR
Trained in light armor, medium armor, 
and shieldsSPELLS
Trained in divine spell rolls and DCs and in 
attack rolls for divine spells
SIGNATURE SKILLS
DiplomacyMedicinePerformance
Religion
One skill determined by your deity 
PLAYING A CLERIC
Players of cleric characters might approach gameplay in the following ways.
Ł During combat, you trade ofi between casting spells and attacking with weapons—
typically the favored weapon of your deity. Most of your spells can boost, protect, 
or heal your allies. Your ability to channel energy lets you cast 
heal for your allies or 
harm on your enemies more often, depending on your deity. 

Ł During social encounters, you might make diplomatic overtures or deliver impressive 
speeches. Because you're wise, you also pick up on falsehoods others tell.

Ł In exploration mode, you detect nearby magic and interpret any religious writing 
you come across. You might also concentrate on a protective spell for your allies in 
case of attack. After a battle or hazard, you might heal anyone who was hurt.

Ł In downtime, you might perform services at a temple, travel to spread the word of your 
deity, research scripture, celebrate holy days, or even found a new temple.
ROLEPLAYING A CLERIC
Clerics have an unmatched reputation for devotion to their deities. IF YOU'RE A CLERIC, YOU LIKELY...

Ł Have an immediate affinity with other worshipers of your deity.

Ł Visit the temples and holy places sacred to your faith.

Ł Know the teachings of your religion's holy texts and how they apply to a dilemma.

Ł Cooperate with your allies, provided they don't ask you to go against divine will.
OTHERS PROBABLY...

Ł Assume you're a fanatic in all things.

Ł Expect you to heal their wounds.

Ł Rely on you to interact with other religious figures.
CLASS FEATURES
You gain these abilities as a cleric. Abilities gained at higher levels list the 
requisite levels next to the features' names. DIVINE
 SPELLCASTING
You have the power to cast divine spells using the Cast a Spell activity, and you 
gain access to the Material Casting, Somatic Casting, and Verbal Casting actions 
(see Spellcasting on page 195). Because you're a cleric, you can usually hold a 
divine focus (such as a religious symbol or a religious text) as part of your Material 
Casting and Somatic Casting actions, so you usually don't need spell components 
or another hand free. At 1st level, you can prepare two 1st-level spells and four 
cantrips each morning from the common spells on the divine spell list in this book 
(see page 200) or from other divine spells to which you gain access. Prepared 
spells remain available to you until you cast them or until you prepare your spells 
again. The number of spells you can prepare are called your spell slots. 
As you increase in level as a cleric, the number of spells you can prepare each 
day increases, as does the highest level of spell you can cast, as shown on the 
Cleric Spells per Day table on page 70.Some of your spells require you to attempt a spell roll to see how effective they 
are, or have your enemies roll against your spell DC. Since your key ability is 
Wisdom, your spell rolls and spell DCs use your Wisdom modifier. See page 291 
for details on calculating your spell rolls and spell DCs. Heightening SpellsWhen you get spell slots of 2nd level and higher, you can prepare lower-level 
spells in those slots to strengthen them. This increases the spell's level to match 
the heightened spell slot. Many spells have specific improvements when they are 
heightened to certain levels (see page 192).70 TABLE 3–8: CLERIC SPELLS PER DAY
Your
Level
Spell Level
1st2nd3rd
4th5th6th7th8th9th12————————23————————332———————433———————5332——————6333——————73332—————83333—————933332————1033333————11333332———12333333———133333332——143333333——1533333332—1633333333—17333333332183333333331933333333320333333333 TABLE 3–7: CLERIC ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level
Class Features
1 Anathema, ancestry feat, background, channel 
energy, deity and domain, divine spellcasting, initial 
proficiencies
2 Cleric feat, skill feat
32nd-level spells, general feat, skill increase
4 Cleric feat, skill feat
53rd-level spells, ability boosts, ancestry feat, skill 
increase
6 Cleric feat, skill feat
74th-level spells, general feat, skill increase
8 Cleric feat, skill feat
95th-level spells, ancestry feat, skill increase
10 Ability boosts, cleric feat, skill feat
116th-level spells, general feat, skill increase
12 Expert spellcaster, skill feat
137th-level spells, ancestry feat, skill increase
14 Cleric feat, skill feat
158th-level spells, ability boosts, general feat, skill 
increase
16 Master spellcaster, skill feat
179th-level spells, ancestry feat, skill increase
18 Cleric feat, skill feat
19 General feat, legendary spellcaster, skill increase
20 Ability boosts, cleric feat, skill feat
example, as a 1st-level cleric, the highest level of spell you 
can cast is 1st, so your cantrips are 1st-level spells. As a 
5th-level cleric, the highest level of spell you can cast is 
3rd, so your cantrips are 3rd-level spells. DEITY
 AND DOMAIN
Choose one deity you revere above all others. The most 
common deities in Pathfinder appear on Table 3–9: Deities 
on pages 72–73. This table lists each deity's name, areas 
of concern, and alignment, followed by the benefits you 
get for being a cleric of that deity. Your alignment must be 
one allowed by your deity, as listed in parentheses after the 
deity's alignment. Your deity grants you a signature skill 
and the trained proficiency rank with the deity's favored 
weapon. If the favored weapon is uncommon, you also get 
access to that weapon. Your deity also adds spells to your 
spell list. When preparing spells, you can select from these 
in addition to the spells on the divine list once you can cast 
that level of spell. Select one domain—a subject of particular interest to you within the traditions of your religion—from your 
deity's list of domains. This domain grants you a special 
kind of spell called a domain power. Each domain's theme 
and powers appear in Table 3–10: Domains on page 73. 
By choosing a domain, you gain a pool of Spell Points you 
can spend to cast domain powers. You can cast domain 
powers only by spending Spell Points, not by using spell slots. Your maximum number of Spell Points equals your 
key ability modifier (minimum 0). You regain all your 
Spell Points when you prepare your spells. You gain the 
initial power tied to your domain when you select the domain. Your initial domain power costs 1 Spell Point to 
cast and is automatically heightened to the highest level of spell you can cast. Domain powers are available only to characters who've selected the domain and can't be 
learned by others. Some cleric feats grant you more domain powers, and 
such feats typically increase your pool of Spell Points. 
You can learn additional powers, called advanced domain 
powers, by taking the Advanced Domain cleric feat. The 
Spell Point cost of this advanced domain power is listed in 
parentheses after its name in Table 3–10: Domains.
ANATHEMA
Actions fundamentally opposed to your deity's alignment or 
ideals are anathema to your faith. Committing acts, learning 
or casting spells, and using items that are anathema to your 
deity take you out of that deity's good graces. 
Casting spells with the evil trait is almost always anathema to good deities, and casting good spells is likewise anathema to evil deities; similarly, casting chaotic 
spells is anathema to lawful deities and casting lawful spells is anathema to chaotic deities. A neutral cleric who worships a neutral deity isn't limited this way, but 
their alignment might change over time if they frequently cast spells or use abilities with a certain alignment. Cantrips
A cantrip is a special type of spell that doesn't use spell 
slots. You can cast a cantrip at will, any number of times 
per day. A cantrip is always automatically heightened 
to the highest level of spell you can cast as a cleric. For 
71 Similarly,
 casting spells that are anathema to the tenets or goals of your faith could interfere with your connection to your deity. For example, casting a spell to enhance 
your ability to lie would be anathema to Sarenrae, as a goddess of honesty, and casting one to create undead 
would be anathema to Pharasma, the goddess of death. For borderline cases, you and your GM determine whether other acts count as anathema. For example, 
Torag is a god of community, so actions that work to 
destroy a close-knit community are typically anathema to 
Torag. However, as god of dwarves, he might permit you 
to destroy a community of giants that is threatening to wipe out a dwarven settlement. If you perform enough acts that are anathema to your 
deity or if your alignment changes to one not allowed 
by your deity, you lose the magical abilities that come 
from your connection to your deity. The class features 
that you lose are determined by the GM, but they likely 
include channel energy, domain powers, and divine 
spellcasting. These abilities can be regained only if you 
demonstrate your repentance by conducting an atone ritual (see page 275).CHANNEL
 ENERGY
You gain a pool of positive or negative energy, depending 
on your deity, as shown on Table 3–9: Deities on 
pages 72–73. Some deities allow you to choose whether to channel negative or positive energy. Once you choose, 
you can't change the type of energy you channel, short of 
an ethical shift or divine intervention. This pool of energy allows you to cast either the heal spell (for positive energy) or the harm spell (for negative 
energy) a number of times per day equal to 3 plus your 
Charisma modifier without needing to prepare the spell in 
advance. All spells you cast in this way are heightened to 
the maximum spell level you can cast as a cleric. You can 
find heal on page 229 and harm on page 228.CLERIC FEATS 2NDAt 2nd level, you gain a cleric class feat (see page 74). You gain another at 4th, 6th, 8th, 10th, 14th, 18th, and 
20th levels. SKILL FEATS 2NDAt 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill 
feat. Skill feats can be found in Chapter 5 and have the skill 
trait. You must be trained or better in the corresponding 
skill to select a skill feat. GENERAL FEATS 3RDAt 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a 
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.SKILL
 INCREASES 3RDAt 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a 
skill increase. You can use this increase to either become 
trained in one skill you're untrained in, or become an expert in one skill in which you're already trained. If you are at least 7th level, you can use this increase to become a master in a signature skill in which you're already an expert. If you are at least 15th level, you can use this increase to become legendary in a signature skill in which you're already a master.
ABILITY BOOSTS 5TH
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four 
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to 
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability 
score increases it by 1 if it's already 18 or above, or by 2 if 
it starts out below 18.ANCESTRY FEATS 5TH
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain 
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter. 
The list of ancestry feats available to you can be found in 
your ancestry's entry in Chapter 2.
EXPERT SPELLCASTER 12TH
Your proficiency rank for spell rolls, spell DCs, and 
attack rolls for divine spells increases to expert. MASTER
 SPELLCASTER
 16TH
Your proficiency rank for spell rolls, spell DCs, and 
attack rolls for divine spells increases to master.
LEGENDARY SPELLCASTER 19TH
Your proficiency rank for spell rolls, spell DCs, and 
attack rolls for divine spells increases to legendary.
KEY TERMSYou'll see the following key terms in many cleric abilities. 
Good or Evil:
 A feat with the good trait requires you to have 
a good alignment as a prerequisite, and one with the evil trait 
requires you to be evil.
Metamagic: Feats with the metamagic trait allow you to tweak 
the properties of your spells. These feats are triggered when 
you begin casting a spell and typically require you to spend an 
additional spellcasting action to alter the spell's effects. You can't 
use metamagic feats if adding an action to the spell would make 
the spell require more actions than you have remaining on your 
turn. Because most metamagic feats have the same trigger, you 
usually can't use more than one metamagic feat per spell.
72 TABLE 3–9: DEITIES
DeityAreas of Concern
AlignmentChannelSkillWeapon
DomainsSpellsAbadarCities, the law, 
merchants, and wealth
LN (LG, LN, LE)
Negative 
or positive
SocietyCrossbow
Cities, earth, travel, wealth
1st: lock, 4th: creation, 7th: magnificent mansionAsmodeusContracts, pride, slavery, and tyranny
LE (LE)Negative
DeceptionMaceConfidence, fire, trickery, 
tyranny1st: charm, 4th: suggestion, 6th: dominateCalistriaLust, revenge, and 
trickeryCN (CG, CN, CE)Negative 
or positive
DeceptionWhipPain, passion, secrecy, 
trickery1st: charm, 3rd:
 enthrall, 6th: misleadCayden 
CaileanAle, freedom, and wine
CG (NG, CG, CN)Positive
Athletics
RapierCities, freedom, 
indulgence, might1st: fleet step, 2nd: touch of idiocy, 5th: hallucinationDesnaDreams, luck, stars, 
and travelers
CG (NG, CG, CN)Positive
Acrobatics
StarknifeDreams, luck, 
moon, travel
1st: sleep, 3rd:
 dream 
message, 4th: flyErastilFamily, farming, 
hunting, and tradeLG (LG, NG, LN)
Positive
Survival
Longbow
Earth, family, 
nature, wealth
1st: true strike, 3rd:
 wall 
of thorns, 5th: tree stride
GorumBattle, strength, and 
weapons
CN (CN, CE)Negative 
or positive
Athletics
Greatsword
Confidence, destruction, might, zeal
1st: true strike, 2nd: enlarge, 4th: weapon 
stormGozreh
 Nature, the sea, and 
weather
N (NG, LN, N, 
CN, NE)Positive
Survival
Trident
Air, nature, 
travel, water
1st: gust of wind, 3rd:
 lightning bolt, 5th: control 
water
IomedaeHonor, justice, 
rulership, and valor
LG (LG, NG)
Positive
Intimidation
Longsword
Confidence, might, truth, zeal
1st: true strike, 2nd: remove paralysis, 4th: fire 
shieldIrori
History, knowledge, 
and self-perfection
LN (LG, LN, LE)
Negative 
or positive
Athletics
FistKnowledge, 
might, 
perfection, truth1st: jump, 3rd: 
haste, 4th: stoneskinLamashtuAberrance, monsters, and nightmares
CE (CE)Negative 
or positive
Survival
Falchion
Family, might, 
nightmares, 
trickery1st: magic fang, 3rd:
 animal form, 4th: nightmare
NethysMagic, with a dualistic nature of destruction 
and preservation
N (NG, LN, N, 
CN, NE)Negative 
or positive
Arcana
StafiDestruction, knowledge, 
magic, protection
Cantrip: mage hand, 1st: magic missile, 2nd: magic mouth, 3rd: 
levitate,
 4th: blink, 5th: prying eye,
 6th: teleport, 7th: spell turning, 8th: maze,
 9th: disjunctionNorgorberGreed, murder, 
poison, and secrets; 
has four aspects: ally of poisoners Blackfingers, murderous Father 
Skinsaw, the thieving 
Gray Master, and the 
secretive Reaper of 
Reputation
NE (LE, NE, CE, plus N if following 
the Reaper of 
Reputation)
Negative
StealthShortsword
Death, secrecy, 
trickery, wealth
1st: illusory disguise, 3rd:
 invisibility, 4th: phantasmal killerPharasmaBirth, death, fate, and 
prophecy
N (NG, LN, N)Positive
OccultismDaggerDeath, fate, 
healing, knowledge
1st: mindlink, 3rd:
 ghostly weapon, 9th: power word 
killRovagug
Destruction, disaster, 
and wrath
CE (NE, CE)Negative
Athletics
Greataxe
Air, destruction, 
earth, zeal
1st: burning hands, 2nd: enlarge, 6th: disintegrate
73 DomainDescriptionInitial Domain Power
Advanced Domain Power
AmbitionYou strive to keep up with and outpace the competition.
Blind ambitionCompetitive edge 
(2)AirYou can control winds and the weather.
Pushing gustWalk on air 
(1)CitiesYou have powers over urban environments and denizens.
Face in the crowd
Watching the watchers 
(2)ConfidenceYou overcome your fear and project pride.
Veil of confidence
Delusional pride (2)Creation
You have divine abilities related to crafting and art.
Fabricate
Artistic flourish (2)DarknessYou operate in the darkness and take away the light.
Touch of shadows
Darkened eyes 
(2)Death
You have the power to end lives and destroy undead.
Undead's bane
Death's call 
(1)DestructionYou become a conduit for divine devastation.
Destructive cry
Destructive aura 
(2)Dreams
You have the power to enter and manipulate dreams.
Sweet dreams
Dreaming potential 
(3)EarthYou control soil and stone.
Hurtling stoneLocalized quake 
(2)Family
You can aid and protect your family and community more efiectively.
Soothing words
Unity (2)Fate
You see and understand hidden inevitabilities.
Read fate
Tempt fate 
(1)Fire
You control flame.
Fire ray
Flame barrier (1) Freedom
You can liberate yourself and others from shackles and constraints.
Unimpeded strideWord of freedom 
(3)HealingYour healing magic is particularly potent.
Healer's blessing
Healing font (2)IndulgenceYou feast mightily and can shake ofi the effects of overindulging.
Enhance victualsTake its course 
(2)Knowledge
You receive divine insights.
Lorekeeper's fortune
Know the enemy 
(1)LightYou harness the power of the sun and other light sources and punish undead.
Undead's bane
Dazzling flash (2)LuckYou're unnaturally lucky and keep out of harm's way.
Bit of luckLucky break 
(3)MagicYou perform the unexpected and inexplicable.
Divine vessel
Mystic beacon (1)MightYour physical power is bolstered by divine strength.
Athletic exploit
Enduring strength 
(2)MoonYou command powers associated with the moon.
Moonlight glow
Moonbeam (2)Nature
You hold power over animals and plants.
Skin of thornsNature's bounty 
(1)Nightmares
You fill minds with horror and dread.
Waking nightmare
Echoing nightmares 
(2)PainYou punish those who displease you with the sharp sting of pain.
Savor the sting
Retributive pain 
(3)PassionYou can evoke passion, whether as love or lust.
Charming touchCaptivating adoration 
(2)Perfection
You strive to perfect your mind, body, and spirit.
Perfected mind
Perfected form 
(2)Protection
You hold the power to ward yourself and others.
Divine ward
Protective aura 
(2)Secrecy
You protect secrets and keep them hidden.
Forced quiet
Safeguard secret 
(3)Travel
You have power over movement and journeys.
Agile feet
Wanderer's guide 
(3)Trickery
You delight in deceiving others and causing mischief.
Sudden shiftMaster's illusion 
(3)Truth
You can pierce lies and discover the truth.
Word of truth
Glimpse the truth (3)Tyranny
You wield power to rule and enslave others.
Touch of obedience
Commanding lash (2)Undeath
Your magic carries close ties to the undead.
Unlife's blessing
Touch of undeath 
(2)Water
You control water and bodies of water.
Tidal surge
Downpour 
(2)Wealth
You hold power over wealth, trade, and treasure.
Acquisitive's fortune
Money talks 
(1)ZealYour inner fire increases your combat prowess.
Weapon surge
Prepare for battle 
(3)DeityAreas of Concern
AlignmentChannelSkillWeapon
DomainsSpellsSarenrae
Healing, honesty, 
redemption, and the sun
NG (LG, NG, CG)
Positive
Survival
ScimitarFire, healing, 
light, truth1st: burning hands, 3rd:
 fireball, 4th: wall of fire
ShelynArt, beauty, love, and 
musicNG (LG, NG, CG)
Positive
CraftingGlaive
Creation, 
family, passion, 
protection
1st: color spray, 3rd:
 enthrall, 4th: creation
Torag
The forge, protection, 
and strategy
LG (LG, LN)
Positive
CraftingWarhammer
Creation, 
earth, family, 
protection
1st: alarm, 3rd:
 earthbind, 4th: creation
Urgathoa
Disease, gluttony, and 
undeath
NE (LE, NE, CE)Negative
Intimidation
ScytheIndulgence, magic, might, undeath
1st: goblin pox, 2nd: ghoulish cravings, 7th: mask of terror
Zon-Kuthon
Darkness, envy, loss, 
and painLE (LN, LE, NE)Negative
Intimidation
Spiked chainAmbition, 
darkness, 
destruction, pain1st: phantom pain, 3rd:
 wall of thorns, 5th: shadow walk
TABLE 3–9: DEITIES flCONTINUEDfi
TABLE 3–10: DOMAINS
74 CLERIC FEATS
At every level that you gain a cleric feat, you can select one of the following 
feats. You must satisfy any prerequisites before selecting the feat.
1ST LEVEL
COMMUNAL HEALING FEAT 1
 You're a conduit for positive energy, and as you channel it through you it 
heals some of your minor injuries. When you cast the 
heal spell to heal 
a single creature other than yourself, you regain Hit Points equal to the 
spell level of your 
heal spell. DEADLY SIMPLICITY FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 deity with a simple favored weapon, trained with your 
deity's favored weapon
When you are wielding your deity's favored weapon, increase the damage die of that 
weapon by one step (d4 to d6, d6 to d8, d8 to d10, d10 to d12). If the weapon already 
has a damage die of d12, you gain no benefit from this feat.
If your deity's favored weapon has the unarmed trait (such as if you worship Irori 
and have the fist as your favored weapon) and its damage die is lower than d6, this feat 
increases its damage die to d6. 
EMBLAZON SYMBOL FEAT 1
 You can emblazon your religious symbol onto an item. You must spend 1 
minute drawing or engraving a religious symbol of your deity onto a held item with the 
Interact action. Symbols are usually emblazoned onto a weapon or a shield.
This turns the item into a divine focus, allowing you to perform Material Casting and 
Somatic Casting actions without a free hand. The symbol functions only for you, and it 
functions even if the item is dented or broken (but not if it's destroyed).
EXPANDED DOMAIN FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 domainChoose a domain that you don't already have from your deity's list and gain its initial 
domain power (see page 73). You use this additional domain power at a cost of 1 Spell 
Point per use. Increase your Spell Point pool by 1.
Special You can select this feat up to two times, each time selecting a domain you don't 
already have.
 HEALING HANDS FEAT 1
 Trigger
 You start to cast 
heal to heal a living creature or 
harm to heal an undead creature. 
Add a Verbal Casting action to the casting of the triggering spell and increase the number 
of Hit Points the target regains by 1d8. If you are at least 10th level, you instead increase 
the number of Hit Points the target regains by 2d8, and at 20th level, you instead 
increase it by 3d8.
HOLY CASTIGATION FEAT 1
 You combine holy energy with positive energy to damage demons, devils, 
and their evil ilk. 
Heal spells you cast can damage fiends as though they 
were undead.
LIFE SAPPING FEAT 1
 You draw the life force out of your enemies to heal your own wounds. 
When you cast a 
harm spell and damage a single living creature, you 
regain Hit Points equal to the spell level of your 
harm spell. If you aren't a living 
creature, you gain no benefit from this feat.
ClericHealingPositive
ClericClericClericClericMetamagicClericGoodClericHealingCLERIC FEATS
If you need to look up a cleric feat by 
name instead of by level, use this table.
Feat
Level
Advanced Domain
4 Align Armament8 Cantrip Expansion4 Cast Down
8 Channel Smite4 Channeled Succor8 Command Undead4 Communal Healing1 Conical Channel4 Deadly Simplicity1 Defensive Recovery
14 Deity's Protection
14 Divine Will8 Elemental Channel8 Emblazon Symbol
1 Expanded Domain1 Fast Channel
14 Healing Hands1 Heroic Recovery
8 Holy Castigation
1 Improved Command Undead
8 Improved Communal Healing
4 Improved Elemental Channel
14 Irresistible Energy
4 Life Sapping1 Metamagic Channeler20 Miraculous Power
20 Necrotic Infusion
4 Reach Spell
1 Selective Energy
4STeady Spellcasting4 Turn Undead
1 Warrior Priest
1475 REACH SPELL FEAT 1
 Trigger
 You start to cast a spell that has a 
range. The spell must have a maximum of 2 
spellcasting actions. You add a Somatic Casting action to the casting of the 
triggering spell to increase its range by 30 feet. If the spell 
normally has a range of touch, you instead extend its range to 
30 feet, and if the touch spell normally requires an attack roll 
or a touch attack roll, it now requires a ranged attack roll or a 
ranged touch attack roll, as appropriate.
TURN UNDEAD FEAT 1
 Undead harmed by your positive energy might 
flee from your holy might, compelled by an innate 
aversion to this supernatural force that opposes undeath at 
a fundamental level. When you use a 
heal spell to damage 
undead, each undead that critically fails its save or that you 
critically hit with your touch attack gains the fleeing condition 
for 1 round. 
4TH LEVEL
ADVANCED DOMAIN FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 domainYour studies or prayers have unlocked the deeper 
secrets of your deity's domain. You gain the 
advanced domain power from one of your domains 
(as listed on Table 3–10: Domains on pages 72–73). 
Increase your Spell Point pool by the number of 
points this new domain power costs to cast.
Special You can select this feat once per domain for 
which you have the initial domain power. Each time, you 
gain an advanced domain power for a different domain.
CANTRIP EXPANSION FEAT 4
 You can prepare two additional cantrips each day.
 CHANNEL SMITE FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 channel energyCost Expend one of your daily 
harm or heal spells granted by channel energy.
Instead of casting harm or heal, you siphon the destructive 
energies you channel through a melee attack and into 
your foe. Make a melee Strike. This Strike has one of the 
following additional effects on a success.

Ł If you channel positive energy and the target is 
undead, you deal extra positive damage equal to that 
of a single-target 
heal spell.
Ł If you channel negative energy and the target is 
a living creature, you deal extra negative damage 
equal to that of a single-target 
harm spell. If your Strike fails or hits a creature that isn't afiected by 
that energy type, the spell is expended with no efiect.
If you channel positive energy, this action has the good 
and positive traits. If you channel negative energy, it has the 
evil and negative traits.
ClericMetamagicClericGoodClericClericClericDivineNecromancy
CONTROLLING UNDEAD
Controlled undead gain the minion trait. Minions can use 2 actions 
per turn and can't use reactions. A minion acts on your turn in 
combat when you spend an action to issue it verbal commands (this 
action has the concentrate trait). If given no commands, undead 
minions use no actions except to defend themselves or to escape 
obvious harm. If left unattended for at least 1 minute, mindless 
undead minions don't act, whereas intelligent ones act as they 
please. You can't have more than four undead minions at a time.
76 COMMAND UNDEAD FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 channel energy (negative)
Trigger
 You begin casting 
harm using channel energy targeting one undead creature with a level 
equal to or less than your cleric level – 3.
You add a Verbal Casting action to the casting of the triggering 
spell to change its effects on the target. The harm spell gains a duration of 24 hours. Instead of being subject to 
harm's normal 
effects, the target attempts a Will saving throw to resist being 
controlled by you. If the target is already controlled, the current 
controller also receives a saving throw, and the undead uses the 
better result.
Success No efiect. Critical Success No efiect, and the undead is bolstered.
Failure
 You control the undead creature for 1 minute. The 
efiect ends if you or an ally attacks the undead. 
Critical Failure
 You control the undead creature for 1 hour. The 
efiect ends if you or an ally attacks the undead.
CONICAL CHANNEL FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 channel energyYou can make energy you channel flash out from you in a single 
direction, reaching farther and in a more directed fashion. When 
you cast the 3-action version of 
harm or heal, you can make its 
area a 60-foot cone instead of a 30-foot aura.
IMPROVED COMMUNAL HEALING FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Communal HealingYou can grant the bonus healing from Communal Healing to 
any creature within the range of your 
heal spell instead of just yourself. You also get the benefit of Communal Healing when you 
target only yourself with a 
heal spell, though you must give the 
bonus healing to someone other than yourself.
IRRESISTIBLE ENERGY FEAT 4
 You ablate the resistance some creatures have to 
positive or negative energy. If you cast 
heal, the target reduces 
any bonus it has on saves against positive energy by 1 for your 
spell, and it lowers any resistance it has to positive energy by 
an amount equal to your Charisma modifier for your spell. If you 
cast harm, the target reduces any bonus it has to saves against 
negative energy by 1 for your spell, and it lowers any resistance 
it has to negative energy by an amount equal to your Charisma 
modifier for your spell.
 NECROTIC INFUSION FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 channel energy (negative)
Trigger
 You start to cast 
harm to heal a single undead creature.
You pour negative energy into your undead subject to 
empower its attacks. You add a Verbal Casting action to 
the casting of the triggering spell to infuse the target with 
negative energy. The target then deals 1d6 additional negative 
damage with its melee weapons and unarmed attacks until 
the end of its next turn.
If the harm spell was at least 5th level, this damage increases 
ClericEvil
MetamagicClericClericClericClericEvil
Metamagicto 2d6, and if the harm spell was at least 9th level, the damage 
increases to 3d6.
SELECTIVE ENERGY FEAT 4
 You can prevent enemies and allies from gaining 
the benefit or facing the wrath of your divine power. When you 
cast the 3-action version of 
harm or heal, you can designate a 
number of creatures equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum 
1) that are not targeted by the spell. 
STEADY SPELLCASTING FEAT 4
 Your spells are disrupted by reactions (see 
page 196) only if you take damage equal to or greater than 
double your character level.
8TH LEVEL
 ALIGN ARMAMENT FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 deity with a chaotic, evil, good, or 
lawful alignment
Frequency
 once per round
When you select this feat, choose chaotic, evil, good, or lawful. 
Your choice must match one of your deity's alignments. This 
action has the trait corresponding to the chosen alignment.
You touch a weapon. That weapon deals 1d6 additional 
damage of the chosen type to creatures of the opposed 
alignment. For example, if you chose evil when you took this 
feat, the weapon would deal 1d6 evil damage to good creatures.
Special You can take this feat a second time, choosing one of 
your deity's other alignments. When you Align an Armament, 
you can choose either alignment. If you Align the Armament 
again, the most recently applied alignment overrides the 
previous one, so you can't use Align Armament to make the 
same weapon deal both 1d6 evil damage and 1d6 lawful damage 
simultaneously, for example.
 CAST DOWN FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 channel energyTrigger
 You start to cast 
harm or heal to damage a single creature.
You add a Verbal Casting action to the casting of the triggering 
spell. If the target takes any damage from your 
harm or heal spell, it's knocked prone. If you critically hit the target or it critically 
fails its save, the target is also hampered 10 for 1
 minute. CHANNELED SUCCOR FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 channel energy (positive)
You can channel energy to remove conditions. You can use your 
channel energy to cast any of the following spells you know 
(a single use of channel energy casts one spell): 
remove curse, 
remove disease, remove paralysis, 
or restoration
. The spell is 
heightened to the highest level of spell you can cast.
DIVINE WILL FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 expert in Will saving throws 
Your faith grants you mastery of your own will. Your proficiency 
ClericClericClericMetamagicClericDivineEvocation
ClericMetamagicClericCleric77rank in Will saves increases to master. When you succeed at a 
Will save, treat the outcome as a critical success.
ELEMENTAL CHANNEL FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 channel energy; air, earth, fire, or 
water domain
Your control over an element is great enough that you can focus 
your channeled energy to heal or damage elementals of that 
type. When you use your channel energy to cast 
harm or heal, you can name one domain you have: air, earth, fire, or water. You 
forgo the normal efiect of the spell, and instead heal or damage 
elementals with a trait that matches the named domain. You 
choose whether to harm or heal the elementals regardless of 
what type of energy you channel. The spell has the positive trait 
if you choose to heal them or the negative trait if you choose to 
damage them. HEROIC RECOVERY FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 channel energy (positive)
Trigger
 You start to cast 
heal. You add a Verbal Casting action to the casting of 
the triggering spell to make the spell's target accelerated 5 and 
grant it a +1 conditional bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls 
until the end of its next turn.
IMPROVED COMMAND UNDEAD FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 channel energy (negative), Command 
Undead When you use Command Undead, if the undead succeeds at its 
save but doesn't critically succeed, you control it for 1 round. 
If the undead fails its save, you control it for 10 minutes. If it 
critically fails, you control it for 24 hours.
14TH LEVEL
 DEFENSIVE RECOVERY FEAT 14

Prerequisites
 channel energyTrigger
 You start to cast 
harm or heal to heal a single creature.
You add a Verbal Casting action to the casting of the triggering 
spell to grant the target a +1 conditional bonus to AC and saving 
throws for 1 minute.
DEITY'S PROTECTION FEAT 14

Prerequisites
 channel energy, Advanced Domain
When you call upon your deity's power to fulfill the promise of 
their domain, you gain divine protection. After you cast a domain 
power, you gain resistance to all damage until the start of your 
next turn. The amount of resistance is equal to your number of 
daily uses of channel energy.
  FAST CHANNEL FEAT 14

Prerequisites
 channel energyTrigger
 You start to cast 
harm or heal using channel energy.
You can change one of the spellcasting actions of the triggering 
ClericClericGoodMetamagicClericEvil
ClericMetamagicClericClericClericMetamagicspell to a reaction instead of an action. The spell still requires 
a minimum of one Somatic Casting action to cast. For instance, 
you could target a creature at range by spending a Somatic 
Casting action and a Verbal Casting reaction. When you use Fast 
Channel, your 
harm or heal is heightened to your second-highest 
level spell, rather than your highest.
IMPROVED ELEMENTAL CHANNEL FEAT 14

Prerequisites
 Elemental ChannelWhen you use Elemental Channel, you can name any element, 
not just ones that match a domain you have. When afiecting an 
area, you can choose one type of elemental to harm and one to 
heal. The effects are simultaneous.
Elementals you heal with Elemental Channel each gain a 
+1 conditional bonus to attack and damage rolls until the end 
of their next turn. Elementals you damage with Elemental 
Channel become sluggish 1 for 1 minute if they fail their saves (or 
automatically if you used a touch 
harm or heal). WARRIOR PRIEST FEAT 14

Prerequisites
 trained or better with your deity's 
favored weapon
You become an expert with your deity's favored weapon. When 
you critically succeed at an attack roll using that weapon, you 
apply the weapon's critical specialization efiect.
20TH LEVEL
METAMAGIC CHANNELER FEAT 20

When you apply a metamagic feat to a 
harm or heal spell, you don't have to add an action to the spell's casting.
MIRACULOUS POWER FEAT 20

Prerequisites
 legendary in Religion
You gain a single 10th-level spell slot that you can use to cast 10th-
level divine spells using your divine spellcasting class feature. 
When you select this feat, add two 10th-level divine spells of 
common or uncommon rarity to your list of spells known.
ClericClericClericCleric78
The power of nature is impossible to resist. It can bring ruin to the 
stoutest fortress in minutes, reducing even the mightiest works to 
rubble, burning them to ash, burying them beneath an avalanche of 
snow, or drowning them beneath the waves. It can provide endless 
bounty and breathtaking splendor to those who respect it and an 
agonizing death to those who take it too lightly. You are one of those 
who hear nature's call. You stand in awe of the majesty of its power 
and give yourself over to its service.
DRUID
79 KEY ABILITYWisdomHIT POINTS8 plus your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
PERCEPTION
Trained
SAVING THROWS Expert in Fortitude
Trained in Reflex
Expert in WillSKILLS
Trained in a number of skills equal to 
4 plus your Intelligence modifier.
WEAPONS 
Trained in all simple weapons and the 
scimitarARMOR 
Trained in all light and medium armor not 
made of metal
Trained in light and heavy shields not 
made of metalSPELLS 
Trained in primal spell rolls and DCs and 
in attack rolls for primal spells
SIGNATURE SKILLS
CraftingNature
Survival
One skill determined by your order
PLAYING A DRUID
Players of druid characters might approach gameplay in the following ways:
Ł During combat, you call upon the forces of nature to defeat your enemies and 
protect your allies. You can cast spells drawing upon primal magic to summon 
deadly animals to fight at your side, grant resilience to you and your friends, or 
heal their wounds. Depending on your bond to nature, you might also call upon 
powerful elemental magic or even change shape into a terrifying beast to fight 
with tooth and claw. 

Ł During social encounters, you represent balance and a reasoned approach to 
problems, looking for solutions that not only are best for the natural world, but 
also allow the creatures within it to live in harmony and peace. You often propose 
compromises that allow both sides to gain what they truly need, even if they can't 
have all that they desire.

Ł 
 In exploration mode, your skills in nature are invaluable. You can track down 
enemies, navigate through the wilderness, or use your spells to detect any magical 
auras around you. You might even ask wild animals to assist your group in your 
travels with their extraordinary senses and scouting abilities.

Ł In downtime mode, you might craft magic items or potions. Alternatively, your tie 
to nature might lead you to tend to an area of the wild, befriending its beasts and 
healing the wounds caused by civilization. You might even attempt to teach people 
sustainable techniques that allow them to subsist ofi the land without harming the 
natural balance.
ROLEPLAYING A DRUID
Druids are the living embodiment of nature, acting as its agent; you protect 
the wild places from harm and speak for their interests in more civilized lands. IF YOU'RE A DRUID, YOU LIKELY...

Ł Have a deep and meaningful respect for the power of nature.

Ł Are in constant awe of the natural world, eager to share it with others but cautious 
of their influence.
Ł Treat plants and animals as allies in your quest, working with them toward your goals.
OTHERS PROBABLY...

Ł View you as a representative of nature, and might even assume you can control it.

Ł Look at you as a recluse who avoids society and cities, preferring to live in the wild.

Ł Treat you as a mystic, similar to a priest, but answering only to the forces of nature.
CLASS FEATURES
You gain these abilities as a druid. Abilities gained at higher levels list the 
requisite levels next to the features' names. PRIMAL
 SPELLCASTING
You have the power to cast primal spells using the Cast a Spell activity, and you 
gain access to the Material Casting, Somatic Casting, and Verbal Casting actions 
(see Casting Spells on page 195). Because you're a druid, you can usually hold a 
primal focus (such as holly and mistletoe) as part of your Material Casting and 
Somatic Casting actions, so you usually don't need spell components or another 
hand free. At 1st level, you can prepare two 1st-level spells and four cantrips each 
morning from the common spells on the primal spell list in this book (see page 
201), or from other primal spells to which you gain access. Prepared spells remain 
available to you until you cast them or until you prepare your spells again. The 
number of spells you can prepare are called your spell slots. As you increase in level as a druid, the number of spells you can prepare each 
day increases, as does the highest level of spell you can cast, as shown on the 
Druid Spells per Day table on page 81.80 Some of your spells require you to attempt a spell roll 
to see how effective they are, or have your enemies roll 
against your spell DC. Since your key ability is Wisdom, 
your spell rolls and spell DCs use your Wisdom modifier. 
See page 291 for details on calculating your spell rolls and 
spell DCs. Heightening SpellsWhen you get spell slots of 2nd level and higher, you can 
prepare lower-level spells in those slots to strengthen them. 
This increases the spell's level to match the heightened spell 
slot. Many spells have specific improvements when they 
are heightened to certain levels (see page 192).Cantrips
A cantrip is a special type of spell that doesn't use spell 
slots. You can cast a cantrip at will, any number of times 
per day. A cantrip is always automatically heightened 
to the highest level of spell you can cast as a druid. For 
example, as a 1st-level druid, the highest level of spell you 
can cast is 1st, so your cantrips are 1st-level spells. As a 
5th-level druid, the highest level of spell you can cast is 
3rd, so your cantrips are 3rd-level spells. ANATHEMA
As stewards of the natural order, druids find affronts 
to nature anathema. If you perform enough acts that 
are anathema to nature, you lose your magical abilities 
that come from the druid class, including your primal 
spellcasting and the benefits of your order. These abilities 
can be regained only if you demonstrate your repentance 
by conducting an atone ritual (see page 275).The following acts are anathema to all druids:
Ł Using metal armor or shields.
Ł Despoiling natural places.

Ł Teaching the Druidic language to nondruids.
Each druidic order also has additional anathema acts. DRUIDIC
 ORDER
Upon becoming a druid, you align yourself with a druidic 
order, which grants you a class feat, an order power (see 
below), and an additional signature skill tied to your 
order. Though you can still gain class feats tied to other 
orders as you advance, you receive additional benefits 
when using abilities tied to your chosen order. 
You gain a pool of Spell Points. Your maximum number 
of Spell Points is equal to your key ability modifier. You 
regain all your Spell Points when you prepare your spells 
(see Daily Preparations on page 192).You also gain a special spell tied to your order, which 
is called an order power. You cast this order power by 
spending 1 Spell Point, not by using spell slots. Your order 
power is automatically heightened to the highest level of 
spell you can cast. Some druid feats grant you more order 
powers and increase your pool of Spell Points. The druidic orders presented in this book are as follows. AnimalYou have a strong connection to the beasts of the world, 
and you are allied with a beast companion. You are trained 
in Athletics, and it becomes a signature skill for you. You 
also gain the Animal Companion druid feat. Finally, as 
your order power, you can cast 
heal animal at a cost of 
1 Spell Point. Committing wanton cruelty to animals or 
killing animals unnecessarily is anathema to your order. 
(This doesn't prevent you from defending yourself against 
animals or killing them cleanly for food.)LeafYou revere plants and the bounty of nature, acting 
as a gardener and warden for the wilderness, teaching sustainable techniques, and helping areas regrow after disasters or negligent humanoid expansion. You are 
trained in Diplomacy, and it becomes a signature skill for 
you. You also gain the Leshy Familiar druid feat. Finally, 
as your order power, you can cast 
goodberry at a cost of 1 Spell Point. Committing wanton cruelty to plants or killing plants unnecessarily is anathema to your order. 
(This doesn't prevent you from defending yourself against 
plants or harvesting them as necessary for survival.)Storm
You carry nature's fury within you, channeling it to 
terrifying effect and riding the winds and storms. You are 
TABLE 3–11: DRUID ADVANCEMENT
Your
 Level
 Class Features
1 Anathema, ancestry feat, background, Druidic 
language, druidic order, initial proficiencies, primal 
spellcasting, wild empathy
2 Druid feat, skill feat
32nd-level spells, general feat, skill increase
4 Druid feat, skill feat
53rd-level spells, ability boosts, ancestry feat, skill 
increase
6 Druid feat, skill feat
74th-level spells, general feat, skill increase
8 Druid feat, skill feat
95th-level spells, ancestry feat, skill increase
10 Ability boosts, druid feat, skill feat
116th-level spells, general feat, skill increase
12 Expert spellcaster, skill feat
137th-level spells, ancestry feat, skill increase
14 Druid feat, skill feat
158th-level spells, ability boosts, general feat, skill 
increase
16 Master spellcaster, skill feat
179th-level spells, ancestry feat, skill increase
18 Druid feat, skill feat
19 General feat, legendary spellcaster, skill increase
20 Ability boosts, druid feat, skill feat
81 TABLE 3–12: DRUID SPELLS PER DAY
Your
Spell Level
Level
1st2nd3rd
4th5th6th7th8th9th12————————23————————332———————433———————5332——————6333——————73332—————83333—————933332————1033333————11333332———12333333———133333332——143333333——1533333332—1633333333—17333333332183333333331933333333320333333333
trained in Acrobatics, and it becomes a signature skill for 
you. You also gain the Storm Born druid feat. Finally, as 
your order power, you can cast 
tempest surge at a cost 
of 1 Spell Point. Creating unnatural weather patterns that 
could be damaging to the local environment (such as by 
using a 9th-level control weather ritual) is anathema to 
your order.
Wild
The savage, uncontrollable call of the natural world infuses 
you, granting you the ability to change your shape to take 
on the ferocious form of a wild creature. You are trained 
in Intimidation, and it becomes a signature skill for you. 
You also gain the Wild Shape druid feat. Finally, as your 
order power, you can cast 
wild claws at a cost of 1 Spell 
Point. Becoming fully domesticated by the temptations 
of civilization is anathema to your order. (This doesn't 
prevent you from buying and using processed goods or 
staying in a city for an adventure, but you can never come 
to rely on these conveniences or truly call such a place 
your permanent home.)DRUIDIC
 LANGUAGE
You know Druidic, a secret language known only to 
druids, in addition to any languages you know through 
your ancestry. Druidic has its own alphabet. If you use 
sign languages instead of spoken languages, you know the 
sign language version of Druidic. Teaching the Druidic 
language to nondruids is anathema (see page 80).WILD EMPATHY
You have a connection to the creatures of the natural 
world that allows you to communicate with them on a 
rudimentary level. You can use Diplomacy to Make an 
Impression on animals and to make very simple Requests 
of them. 
DRUID FEATS 2NDAt 2nd level, you gain a druid class feat (see page 82). You gain another at 4th, 6th, 8th, 10th, 14th, 18th, and 
20th levels. SKILL FEATS 2NDAt 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill 
feat. Skill feats can be found in Chapter 5 and have the skill 
trait. You must be trained or better in the corresponding 
skill to select a skill feat. GENERAL FEATS 3RDAt 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a 
general feat. General feats can be found in Chapter 5.SKILL
 INCREASES 3RDAt 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a 
skill increase. You can use this increase to either become 
trained in one skill you're untrained in, or become an 
expert in one skill in which you're already trained. If you are at least 7th level, you can use this increase to become a master in a signature skill in which you're 
already an expert. If you are at least 15th level, you can use this increase to become legendary in a signature skill in which you're already a master.
ABILITY BOOSTS 5TH
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four 
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to 
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability 
score increases it by 1 if it's already 18 or above, or by 2 
if it starts out below 18.ANCESTRY FEATS 5TH
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain 
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter. 
The list of ancestry feats available to you can be found in 
your ancestry's entry in Chapter 2.
EXPERT SPELLCASTER 12TH
Your proficiency rank for spell rolls, spell DCs, and attack 
rolls for primal spells increases to expert. MASTER
 SPELLCASTER
 16TH
Your proficiency rank for spell rolls, spell DCs, and attack 
rolls for primal spells increases to master.
LEGENDARY SPELLCASTER 19TH
Your proficiency rank for spell rolls, spell DCs, and attack 
rolls for primal spells increases to legendary.
82 KEY TERMS You'll see the following key term in many 
druid abilities. Order Traits:
 The Animal Order, Leaf 
Order, Storm Order, and Wild Order traits 
indicate feats associated with a specific 
druidic order. Though you do not need to 
belong to the corresponding order to take 
a feat that has an order trait, you often 
gain an additional benefit when taking a feat that matches your order. 
Metamagic: Metamagic feats trigger 
when you begin casting a spell and 
typically require you to spend an 
additional spellcasting action to alter the spell's effects. You can't use metamagic 
feats if adding an action to the spell would 
make the spell require more actions than 
you have remaining on your turn. Because 
most metamagic feats have the same 
trigger, you usually can't use more than 
one metamagic feat per spell. 
DRUID FEATS
If you need to look up a druid feat by 
name instead of by level, use this table.
Feat
Level
Animal Companion1 Animal Shape4 Call of the Wild2 Dragon Shape14 Elemental Shape10 Ferocious Shape
8 Form Control
10 Full-Grown Companion
4 Green Empathy
6 Green Tongue
14 Healing Transformation
10 Hierophant's Power
20 Incredible Companion
8 Insect Shape6 Invoke Disaster
18 Leshy Familiar
1 Leyline Conduit
20 Nature Sense
10 Poison Resistance
2 Primal Summons10 Reach Spell
1 Savage Slice
2 Side by Side
10 Soaring Shape8 Specialized Companion 
14STeady Spellcasting4 DRUID FEATS
At every level that you gain a druid feat, you can select one of the following 
feats. You must satisfy any prerequisites before selecting the feat.
1ST LEVEL
ANIMAL COMPANION FEAT 1
 You gain the service of a young animal companion. This companion travels 
with you on your adventures, and it obeys any simple commands you give 
it to the best of its abilities. See the Animal Companion section on page 284 for more 
information about these creatures.
Special If you are a druid of the animal order, your animal companion increases its 
Constitution, Wisdom, and Charisma modifiers by 1.
LESHY FAMILIAR FEAT 1
 You gain a leshy familiar, a Tiny plant that embodies one of the many 
spirits of nature. Other than taking the form of a plant instead of an 
animal, this familiar uses all the same rules as other familiars (see page 287 for more 
details about familiars).Special If you are a druid of the leaf order, your familiar has three powers instead of two.
 REACH SPELL FEAT 1
 Trigger
 You start to cast a spell that has a range. The spell must have a 
maximum of 2 spellcasting actions. You add a Somatic Casting action to the casting of the triggering spell to increase its 
range by 30 feet. If the spell normally has a range of touch, you instead extend its range 
to 30 feet, and if the touch spell normally requires an attack roll or a touch attack roll, it 
now requires a ranged attack roll or a ranged touch attack roll, as appropriate.
STORM BORN FEAT 1
 You are at home out in the elements, reveling in the power of nature 
unleashed. Reduce any circumstance penalties to your ranged attacks or 
Perception checks caused by weather or weather effects (such as wind) by 1.
Special If you are a druid of the storm order, you do not take circumstance penalties to 
ranged attacks or Perception checks caused by weather, and your targeted spells don't 
require a flat check to succeed against a target concealed by weather (such as fog).
 WIDEN SPELL FEAT 1
 Trigger
 You start to cast a spell that has an area of a burst, cone, or line, 
and that does not have a duration. The spell must have a maximum of 
2 spellcasting actions. You add a Somatic Casting action to the casting of the triggering spell and increase the 
area of that spell. You add 5 feet to the radius of a burst that normally has a radius of at 
least 10 feet. You add 5 feet to the length of a cone or line that is normally 15 feet long 
or smaller, and add 10 feet to the length of a larger cone or line.
WILD SHAPE FEAT 1
 You are one with the wild, always changing and adapting to meet any challenge. 
You gain a pool of wild energy, called your wild shape pool, with 1 use that you 
can use to cast a spell to shift your form; if you have at least four wild order feats, increase 
your pool to 2 uses. You can spend a use of your wild shape pool to cast 
pest form. All spells 
you cast using Wild Shape function as if heightened to the maximum spell level you can cast, 
unless stated otherwise.
Special If you are a druid of the wild order, you instead gain a number of uses of Wild 
Shape equal to your Strength modifier (minimum 1), and an additional use if you have at 
least four wild order feats.
Animal Order
DruidDruidLeaf Order
DruidMetamagicDruidStorm Order
DruidMetamagicDruidWild Order
832ND LEVEL
CALL OF THE WILD FEAT 2
 Your bond with nature allows you to call upon 
its servants to aid you in times of need. You can cast 
summon nature's ally 
by spending 1 Spell Point instead of using druid spell 
slots. This spell can be heightened to any level that you can cast, 
but if you cast it as the highest-level spell you can cast, it costs 
you 1 additional Spell Point. Increase your Spell Point pool by 2.
POISON RESISTANCE FEAT 2
 You gain a +1 conditional bonus to saving throws 
against poison, and poison resistance equal to half your level. 
  SAVAGE SLICE FEAT 2
 Requirements 
Your last action was a weapon Strike 
that dealt slashing damage.
Make another Strike against the same target using the same weapon. If it hits, add an additional die of damage.
4TH LEVEL
ANIMAL SHAPE FEAT 4
 Prerequisites 
Wild Shape You can cast 
animal form
 by spending a use of your 
wild shape pool. You can do so at 4th level even though a 3rd-level 
spell is higher than the highest-level spell you can otherwise cast.
FULLflGROWN COMPANION FEAT 4
 Prerequisites 
Animal Companion Your animal companion grows up, becoming 
a full-grown animal companion, which grants it additional 
capabilities. See the animal companion rules on page 284 for 
more information.
Special If you are a druid of the animal order, your animal 
companion is more controlled than most. During an encounter, 
even if you don't use the Command an Animal action, your animal 
companion can still use 1 action that round on your turn to Stride 
or Strike. STEADY SPELLCASTING FEAT 4
 Your spells are disrupted by reactions (see 
page 196) only if you take damage equal to or greater than 
double your character level.
THOUSAND FACES FEAT 4
 Your form is as mutable as the weather, changing 
to meet your whim. You can cast 
humanoid transformation 
by 
spending 1 Spell Point. The spell can target only you. Increase 
your Spell Point pool by 1.
WOODLAND STRIDE FEAT 1
 You ignore any difficult terrain caused by plants, 
such as bushes, vines, and undergrowth. Plants 
that have been manipulated by magic (such as the spell 
entangle) still impede your progress, although you receive a +2 
DruidDruidDruidDruidWild Order
Animal Order
DruidDruidDruidDruidDruid Leaf Order
conditional bonus to any saves or skill checks allowed against 
such effects. Special If you are a druid of the leaf order, even plants 
manipulated by magic don't impede your progress.
6TH LEVEL
GREEN EMPATHY FEAT 6
 You can communicate with plants on a rudimentary 
level and make very simple requests of them. Non-
creature plants typically can't fulfill most requests you might ask 
of them unless you have access to other magic such as 
speak with plants. Special If you are a druid of the leaf order, you gain a 
+2 circumstance bonus on your check to make a Request of a 
plant using Green Empathy.
INSECT SHAPE FEAT 6
 Prerequisites 
Wild Shape You can cast 
insect form by spending a use of your 
wild shape pool.  STORM RETRIBUTION FEAT 6
 Prerequisites 
Storm Born Trigger
 An opponent adjacent to you critically hits 
you with a melee weapon.
You cast 
tempest surge 
on the triggering opponent. You must 
spend 2 Spell Points to use this ability instead of the usual 1; if 
you aren't a druid of the storm order, this doesn't grant you the 
ability to cast tempest surge 
without using Storm Retribution.
Special If you are a druid of the storm order, the triggering foe 
is also pushed back 5 feet if it fails its Reflex save, or 10 feet if 
it critically fails. Special If you are a druid of the storm order, your 
tempest surge 
damage dice become d12s instead of d10s, whether or not you 
are using Storm Retribution.
8TH LEVEL
FEROCIOUS SHAPE FEAT 8
 Prerequisites 
Animal Shape, Wild Shape You can cast 
dinosaur form by spending a use of 
your wild shape pool.
INCREDIBLE COMPANION FEAT 8
 Prerequisites 
Full-Grown Companion 
Your animal companion continues to grow in 
power, becoming a nimble or savage animal companion (your 
choice), and gaining additional capabilities determined by the 
type of companion. See the animal companion rules on page 284 for more information.
SOARING SHAPE FEAT 8
 Prerequisites 
Animal Shape or Insect Shape, Wild 
Shape 
You can cast 
aerial form by spending a use of your wild shape 
DruidLeaf Order
DruidWild Order
DruidStorm Order
DruidWild Order
Animal Order
DruidDruidWild Order
84pool. If you have Animal Shape, you can turn into a bat or a bird. 
If you have Insect Shape, you can turn into a wasp. If you have 
Ferocious Shape, you can turn into a pterosaur.  
WIND CALLER FEAT 8
 Prerequisites 
Storm BornYou can cast 
thunder shield by spending 1 Spell Point. 
You can also cast 
stormwind flight by spending 2 Spell Points.
Special If you are a druid of the storm order, increase your Spell 
Point pool by 2.
10TH LEVEL
ELEMENTAL SHAPE FEAT 10

Prerequisites 
Wild Shape You can cast 
elemental form by spending a use of 
your wild shape pool.
 FORM CONTROL FEAT 10

Prerequisites 
Wild ShapeTrigger
 Using Wild Shape, you cast a polymorph 
spell with a duration of 1 minute or longer that would ordinarily 
be heightened at least 1 level above its lowest spell level.
You add a Somatic Casting action to the casting of the triggering 
spell and spend an additional use of your wild shape pool. The spell 
is heightened to 1 level less than your maximum spell level, instead 
of to your maximum spell level, but you can remain transformed 
for up to 1 hour or the listed duration (whichever is longer). You 
can still dismiss the form at any time, as permitted by the spell.
 HEALING TRANSFORMATION FEAT 10

Trigger
 You cast a non-cantrip polymorph spell 
that targets only one creature.
Add a Somatic Casting action to the casting of the triggering spell to 
restore 1d6 Hit Points per level of the triggering spell to the target. 
NATURE SENSE FEAT 10

You can sense magic afiecting plants and animals. 
You are constantly under the effects of a 1st-
level 
detect magic spell that senses only magic 
afiecting a plant or animal. This detects magic in your field of 
vision only, and only if that magic is afiecting plants or animals. 
When you Seek, you gain the effects of a 3rd-level 
detect magic spell on such magic on things you see (in addition to the normal 
benefits of Seeking), and you might gain an indication if a plant 
or animal has been shaped or changed from its natural form by 
magic, at the GM's discretion. You can turn this sense ofi and on 
with a free action triggered at the start or the end of your turn.
 PRIMAL SUMMONS FEAT 10

 Prerequisites 
Call of the Wild Whenever you summon an ally, you can imbue it with elemental 
power. Upon casting 
summon nature's ally, you can enhance the 
spell as a free action by spending 1 Spell Point and picking air, 
earth, fire, or water. This afiects the creatures summoned by 
giving them the corresponding ability or abilities:
DruidStorm Order
DruidWild Order
DruidMetamagicDruidMetamagicDetectionDivination
DruidDruid
Ł Air fly Speed of 80 feet
Ł Earth burrow Speed of 20 feet, reduce land Speed by 10 feet 
(minimum 5 feet), resistance 5 to physical damage

Ł Fire 
attacks deal 1d6 extra fire damage, resistance 10 to 
fire, weakness 5 to cold and water

Ł Water 
swim Speed of 60 feet, can spend 1 action after a melee 
attack to attempt a Shove (ignoring multiple attack penalty), 
resistance 5 to fire
SIDE BY SIDE FEAT 10

Prerequisites 
Animal CompanionYou and your companion fight as one. Whenever 
you and your animal companion are both adjacent to the same 
foe, you both count as if you were flanking that foe, regardless 
of your actual position.
14TH LEVEL
DRAGON SHAPE FEAT 14

Prerequisites 
Soaring Shape, Wild Shape You can cast 
dragon form
 by spending a use of 
your wild shape pool.
GREEN TONGUE FEAT 14

Prerequisites 
Green Empathy
You (and your leshy familiar if you have one) are 
constantly under the effects of speak with plants. Special If you are a druid of the leaf order, most non-creature 
plants recognize you as a druid of the leaf order and are friendly 
to you.
SPECIALIZED COMPANION FEAT 14

Prerequisites 
Incredible Companion 
Your animal companion continues to grow in power 
and ability, and it is now cunning enough to become specialized. 
Select one specialization from those found in the animal 
companion rules on page 284 and apply it to your companion.
Special If you are a druid of the animal order, you can select this 
feat more than once. Each time, add a different specialization to 
your companion.
18TH LEVEL
INVOKE DISASTER FEAT 18

Prerequisites 
Wind Caller You can cast 
storm lord 
by spending 1 Spell 
Point instead of using your druid spell slots. You can also cast 
earthquake by spending 2 Spell Points. You can cast 
stormwind flight for 1 Spell Point instead of 2.
Special If you are a druid of the storm order, increase your Spell 
Point pool by 2.
VERDANT METAMORPHOSIS FEAT 18

You transform into a plant version of yourself. 
You gain the plant trait and lose any trait that's 
inappropriate for your new form (typically humanoid). You can 
Animal Order
DruidDruidWild Order
DruidLeaf Order
Animal Order
DruidDruidStorm Order
DruidLeaf Order
85change from a form that looks mostly like your old self into a 
tree or any other non-creature plant as an action (this action 
has the concentrate trait). Perception checks don't reveal your 
true form, but a creature can attempt a Nature or Survival check 
against your class DC to determine that the plant is new to the 
surrounding area. While in this form, you can observe everything 
around you, but you can't act other than to spend an action (this 
action has the concentrate trait) to change back, which ends your 
turn. In this form, your AC is 30, your TAC is 20, only conditional 
bonuses, conditional penalties, and circumstance bonuses and 
penalties can afiect you, and you treat all successes and critical 
successes on Reflex saves as failures.
Special If you are a druid of the leaf order, if you transform 
into a non-creature plant and take your daily rest during 
daylight hours, the rest restores you to maximum Hit Points 
and removes all non-permanent drained, enfeebled, sluggish, 
and stupefied conditions.20TH LEVEL
HIEROPHANT'S POWER FEAT 20

Prerequisites 
legendary in Nature
You gain a single 10th-level spell slot, which you can use to 
cast 10th-level spells using your druid spellcasting. When you 
select this feat, add two 10th-level primal spells of common or 
uncommon rarity to your list of spells known. 
 LEYLINE CONDUIT FEAT 20

Frequency
 once per minuteTrigger
 You start to cast a spell of 5th level or lower that has no 
duration and a maximum of 2 spellcasting actions.
You add a Somatic Casting action to the casting of the triggering 
spell, and you don't expend the prepared spell as you cast it.
TRUE SHAPESHIFTER FEAT 20

Prerequisites 
Dragon Shape, Wild Shape You can cast 
shapechange by spending a use of 
your wild shape pool.
DruidDruidWild Order
86 Fighting for honor, greed, loyalty, or simply your own uncontrollable 
bloodlust, you are an undisputed master of weaponry and combat 
techniques. You combine your actions through clever combinations 
of opening moves, finishing strikes, and counterattacks whenever 
your foes are unwise enough to drop their guard. Whether you are 
a knight, mercenary, sharpshooter, or blademaster, you hone your 
martial skills to an art form and perform devastating critical attacks 
on your enemies.
FIGHTER87 KEY ABILITYStrength or Dexterity
HIT POINTS10 plus your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
PERCEPTIONExpertSAVING THROWS Expert in Fortitude
Expert in Reflex
Trained in Will
SKILLS
Trained in a number of skills equal to 
 3 plus your Intelligence modifier
WEAPONSExpert in all simple and martial weapons
Trained in all exotic weapons
ARMOR
Trained in all armor and shields
SIGNATURE SKILLS
Acrobatics
Athletics
CraftingPLAYING A FIGHTER
Players of fighter characters might approach gameplay in the following ways.
Ł During combat, you stand between allies and enemies if you're a melee fighter. You 
draw fire and deal out major damage with unmatched accuracy. Your ability to attack 
foes who move away lets you punish those who try to get past you. If you're a ranged 
fighter, you deliver precise shots from a distance. It's likely you'll benefit from spells 
from spellcasting allies to make you tougher, faster, or better at attacking. 

Ł During social encounters, you can be an intimidating presence. This can be good when 
negotiating with enemies but is sometimes a liability in more genteel interactions.

Ł In exploration mode, you keep up your defenses in preparation for combat or keep 
an eye out for hidden threats. Physical challenges in your way fall to your prowess 
as you break down doors, lift obstacles, climb adeptly, or leap across pits.

Ł In downtime mode, you might work for a living doing manual labor. You could also learn 
a craft, repairing your gear and creating new armaments. If you know old techniques 
you no longer favor, you might train yourself in new ones. If you've established your 
reputation, you might even build an organization or a stronghold of your own.
ROLEPLAYING A FIGHTER
Fighters master martial combat and the weapons and armor needed to go toe-to-toe with deadly monsters. IF YOU'RE A FIGHTER, YOU LIKELY...

Ł Know the purpose and quality of every weapon and piece of armor you own.

Ł Have your friends' backs no matter the situation.

Ł Recognize that the danger of an adventurer's life must be balanced out with great 
revelry or ambitious works.

Ł Have little patience for puzzles or problems that require detailed logic or study.
OTHERS PROBABLY...

Ł Find you intimidating until they get to know you—and maybe even after they get to 
know you.

Ł Think you're all brawn and no brains.

Ł Expect you to be a mercenary or a soldier and to have no authority of your own.
CLASS FEATURES
You gain these abilities as a fighter. Abilities gained at higher levels list the 
requisite levels next to the features' names. ATTACK
 OF
 OPPORTUNITY
You gain the Attack of Opportunity reaction.
 ATTACK OF OPPORTUNITY
Trigger
 A creature within your reach uses a manipulate action or a move 
action, makes a ranged attack, or leaves a square during a move action it's using.
Make a melee Strike against the triggering creature at a –2 penalty. If the attack hits and 
the trigger was a manipulate action, you disrupt that action. This Strike doesn't count 
toward your multiple attack penalty, and your multiple attack penalty doesn't apply to it.
FIGHTER FEATSAt 1st level and every even-numbered level thereafter, you gain a fighter class 
feat. Fighter class feats are described beginning on page 89.SKILL FEATS 2ND
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill feat. Skill feats can be 
found in Chapter 5 and have the skill trait. You must be trained or better in the 
corresponding skill to select a skill feat. Fighter88 TABLE 3–13: FIGHTER ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level
Class Features
1 Ancestry feat, attack of opportunity, background, fighter 
feat, initial proficiencies 
2 Fighter feat, skill feat
3 General feat, skill increase, weapon mastery
4 Fighter feat, skill feat
5 Ability boosts, bravery, ancestry feat, skill increase
6 Fighter feat, skill feat
7 Battlefield surveyor, general feat, skill increase
8 Fighter feat, skill feat
9 Ancestry feat, combat flexibility, skill increase
10 Ability boosts, fighter feat, skill feat
11 General feat, heavy armor expertise, skill increase
12 Fighter feat, skill feat
13 Ancestry feat, skill increase, weapon specialization
14 Fighter feat, skill feat
15 Ability boosts, general feat, improved flexibility, skill 
increase
16 Fighter feat, skill feat
17 Ancestry feat, armor mastery, skill increase
18 Fighter feat, skill feat
19 General feat, skill increase, weapon legend
20 Ability boosts, fighter feat, skill feat
WEAPON MASTERY 3RD
Choose one weapon group. Your proficiency rank increases 
to master with the simple and martial weapons in that 
group and to expert with the exotic weapons in that group. 
You gain access to the critical specialization effects of all 
simple and martial weapons in that group (see page 183).GENERAL FEATS 3RD
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a 
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.SKILL
 INCREASES 3RD
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill 
increase. You can use this increase to either become trained 
in one skill you're untrained in, or become an expert in one 
skill in which you're already trained. If you're at least 7th level, you can use this increase to become a master in a signature skill in which you're already an expert. If you're at least 15th level, you can use it to become legendary in a signature skill in which you're already a master.
BRAVERY
 5TH
When you succeed at a Will save against a fear effect, treat 
it as a critical success instead. If you critically succeed at a save against a fear effect, you gain a +2 circumstance bonus to saves against fear effects for 1 minute. ABILITY BOOSTS 5TH
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four 
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to 
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability score increases it by 1 if it's already 18 or above, or by 2 
if it starts out below 18.ANCESTRY FEATS 5TH
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain 
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter. 
The list of ancestry feats available to you can be found in 
your ancestry's entry in Chapter 2.
BATTLEFIELD SURVEYOR 7TH
You become a master in Perception. In addition, you 
add a +1 circumstance bonus to Perception checks for 
initiative, making you faster to react during combat. COMBAT
 FLEXIBILITY
 9TH
When you make your daily preparations, you gain one 
fighter feat of 8th level or lower that you don't have. You 
can use that feat until your next daily preparations. You 
must meet all its other prerequisites. HEAVY
 ARMOR
 EXPERTISE 11TH
Your proficiency rank for heavy armor and all shields 
increases to expert. WEAPON
 SPECIALIZATION
 13TH
Your proficiency rank for all simple and martial 
weapons increases to master, and you gain access to the 
critical specialization effects of all weapon groups (see 
page 183). Your proficiency rank for all exotic weapons 
increases to expert. You can choose one weapon group and increase your 
proficiency rank to legendary for all simple and martial 
weapons in that weapon group, and to master for all 
exotic weapons in that weapon group. You gain the critical 
specialization effects of all weapons in that weapon group. IMPROVED
 FLEXIBILITY
 15TH
When you use combat flexibility, you can gain two fighter 
feats instead of one. The second feat must be of 14th level of lower and can be one that has the first feat as a 
prerequisite. You must meet all their other prerequisites.
ARMOR MASTERY  
17TH
Your proficiency rank for heavy armor and shields 
increases to master. Reduce your Speed penalty for wearing 
heavy armor from 10 feet to 5 feet. Your proficiency rank 
for medium armor increases to expert. WEAPON
 LEGEND
  
19TH
Your proficiency rank for all simple and martial weapons 
and unarmed attacks increases to legendary, and your 
proficiency rank for all exotic weapons increases to 
master. You gain access to the critical specialization 
effects of all weapon groups.89 FIGHTER FEATS
At each level that you gain a fighter feat, you can select one of the following 
feats. You must satisfy any prerequisites before taking the feat.
1ST LEVEL
 COMBAT GRAB FEAT 1
 Requirements 
You are wielding a one-handed melee weapon and have one 
hand free.
Make a Strike (see page 308). It gains the following enhancement and 
failure effects.
Enhancement Until the end of your next turn, as long as the target is within your 
reach, it's flat-footed. If it leaves your reach, this efiect ends.
Failure
 Until the start of your next turn, as long as the target is within your reach, it's 
flat-footed. If it leaves your reach, this efiect ends.
 DOUBLE SLICE FEAT 1
 Requirements 
You are wielding two melee weapons, each in a different hand.
Make one Strike (see page 308) with each of your two melee weapons, each at your current 
multiple attack penalty. The second Strike takes a –2 circumstance penalty if it's made with 
a weapon that doesn't have the agile trait (see page 182). If both attacks hit, combine the 
attacks' damage, and then add any other applicable enhancements from both weapons. For 
purposes of resistances and weaknesses, this is considered a single Strike. This counts as 
two attacks when calculating your multiple attack penalty (see page 305).
 FURIOUS FOCUS FEAT 1
 Requirements 
You are wielding a melee weapon without the agile trait.
Make a Strike. The Strike gains the following failure efiect.
Failure
 This attack does not count toward your multiple attack penalty.
 POINTflBLANK SHOT FEAT 1
 Requirements 
You are wielding a ranged weapon.
You take aim and hold your weapon to pick ofi nearby enemies quickly. 
When using a ranged volley weapon while in this stance, you don't take the 
circumstance penalty to your attack rolls within the weapon's volley range. When using 
a ranged weapon without the volley trait, you gain a +2 circumstance bonus to damage 
rolls on attacks made within the weapon's first range increment.
 POWER ATTACK FEAT 1
 Make a melee Strike. It gains the following enhancement.
Enhancement You deal an extra weapon damage die. If you're at least a 
10th-level fighter, you deal two extra weapon damage dice. This counts as two 
attacks when calculating your multiple attack penalty.
 REACTIVE SHIELD FEAT 1
 Trigger
 An enemy succeeds or critically succeeds against you with a melee Strike.
You use the Raise a Shield action and gain your shield's bonuses to AC immediately. The 
circumstance bonus from the shield applies to your AC when you're determining the 
outcome of the triggering attack.
 SUDDEN CHARGE FEAT 1
 With a quick sprint, you dash up to your foe and swing. Stride up to double 
your Speed. If you end the move within melee reach of at least one enemy, 
you can make a melee Strike against that enemy. You can use Sudden 
Charge while Burrowing, Climbing, Flying, or Swimming instead of Striding 
if you have the corresponding movement type.
Attack
FighterPress
FighterAttack
FighterPress
FighterOpenStanceFighterOpenFighterAttack
FighterMove
OpenKEY TERMSYou'll see the following key terms in many 
fighter abilities. Enhancements: Enhancements are 
additional effects applied to a Strike. If your Strike doesn't deal damage, 
any enhancements do not apply. Some 
enhancements also require that you 
critically succeed at your attack in order 
to apply the enhancement. Open: Actions with this trait allow you 
to prepare your next Strike or to enter a 
stance, or sometimes to do both. You can 
use an action with the open trait only if you haven't used an action with the attack 
or open trait yet this turn.
Press
: Actions with this trait allow you 
to follow up earlier attacks. An action with 
the press trait can be used only if you are 
currently afiected by a multiple attack 
penalty. Some actions with the press trait 
also grant an efiect on a failure. effects 
on a failure can be gained only if the 
action took a –4 multiple attack penalty 
or worse. The effects that are added on 
a failure don't apply on a critical failure. 
If your press action succeeds or critically 
succeeds, but it deals no damage and causes no other effects (typically due to resistance), you can choose to apply the 
failure efiect instead.
Stance: A stance is a general combat 
strategy that you enter by using an 
action with the stance trait. You can 
enter a stance only in encounter mode. 
A stance lasts until you get knocked 
out, until its requirements (if any) are 
violated, or until you enter a new stance, 
whichever comes first.
90 FIGHTER FEATS
Fighter feats are organized by their level 
prerequisites. If you need to look one up 
by name, use this table for reference.
Feat
Level
Aggressive Shield
2 Agile Grace10 Assisting Shot2 Blind-Fight10 Brutal Finish12 Brutish Shove
2 Certain Strike10 Combat Grab
1 Combat Reflexes
10 Debilitating Shot
10 Desperate Finisher
12 Determination
14 Disruptive
10 Double Shot4 Double Slice1 Dual-Handed Assault4 Dueling Dance12 Dueling Parry2 Dueling Riposte8 Exotic Weapon Training
6 Felling Strike
8 Furious Focus
1 Graceful Poise
16 Guiding Finish14 Guiding Riposte14 Impossible Volley
18 Improved Bravery
6 Improved Brutish Shove
4 Improved Combat Grab
2 Improved Dueling Riposte
12 Improved Reflexive Shield
16 Improved Twin Riposte
14 Incredible Aim
8 Incredible Follow-Up
12 Intimidating Strike
2 Knockdown
14 Mirror Shield
10 Multishot Paragon16 Point-Blank Shot
1 Positioning Assault
8 Power Attack
1 Quick Reversal
4 Quick Shield Block8 Reactionary
20 Reactive Shield
1 Reeling Blow
12 Reflexive Shield
14 Revealing Stab
62ND
 LEVEL
 AGGRESSIVE SHIELD FEAT 2
 Trigger
 You use a Shield Block reaction with a heavy shield, and the 
opponent who triggered that reaction is adjacent to you and your size or smaller.
You push the triggering creature, either automatically Shoving it 5 feet or causing it 
to become flat-footed until the start of your next turn. The triggering creature chooses 
whether to be moved or flat-footed. If it chooses to be moved, you choose the direction. If 
that would cause it to hit a solid object or enter a square of difficult terrain, it must become 
flat-footed instead of being moved. You can't Shove it into another creature's space.
 ASSISTING SHOT FEAT 2
 You can use the Assist action with a ranged weapon you wield. Instead of 
being within reach of the target, you must be within maximum range of the 
target. An Assisting Shot uses ammunition and incurs penalties just like any other attack.
 BRUTISH SHOVE FEAT 2
 Requirements 
You are wielding a two-handed melee weapon.
Make a Strike with the required weapon. It gains the following enhancement 
and failure efiect.
Enhancement You can push the target, either automatically Shoving the target 5 feet 
away from you or causing the target to become flat-footed until the start of your 
next turn. The target chooses whether to be moved or become flat-footed. If it 
chooses to be moved, you choose the direction. If that would cause the target to 
hit a solid piece of terrain or enter a square of difficult terrain, it isn't moved, but 
instead becomes flat-footed until the start of your next turn. You can't Shove it into 
another creature's space.
Failure
 The target becomes flat-footed until the start of your next turn.
 DUELING PARRY FEAT 2
 Requirements 
You are wielding only a single one-handed melee weapon 
and have your other hand or hands free.
You can parry attacks against you with your one-handed weapon. You gain a +2 circumstance 
bonus to AC until the start of your next turn as long as you continue to meet the requirement.
IMPROVED COMBAT GRAB FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 Combat Grab
Your grab roots an enemy in place. When you use Combat Grab, you can gain the 
following enhancement instead of its normal enhancement.
Enhancement Until the end of your next turn, your opponent is grabbed and must break 
free with the Break Grapple action if it wants to move away. Even if it successfully 
breaks the grapple, it remains flat-footed until it is out of your melee reach.
 INTIMIDATING STRIKE FEAT 2
 Your strike not only wounds creatures, but also shatters their confidence. 
Make a melee Strike. It gains the following enhancement.
Enhancement The target is frightened 1 and becomes flat-footed until the 
end of your turn.
4TH LEVEL
 DOUBLE SHOT FEAT 4
 Requirements 
You are wielding a ranged weapon with reload 0.
Make two Strikes, each against a separate target and at a 
 
–2 penalty. Apply 
the multiple attack penalty to attacks only after the second Strike.
FighterAttack
FighterAttack
FighterPress
FighterFighterAttack
Fear
FighterEmotionMentalAttack
FighterOpen91 DUALflHANDED ASSAULT FEAT 4
 Requirements
 You are wielding a one-handed melee weapon and have a 
free hand.
Strike with the required weapon. You quickly switch your grip during the Strike to make the 
attack with two hands. If the weapon doesn't normally have the two-hand trait, increase 
its die by one step for this attack (see the Increasing Weapon Damage Dice sidebar). If 
it has the two-hand trait, you gain the benefit of that trait and a +2 circumstance bonus 
to damage. When the Strike is complete, you resume gripping the weapon with only one 
hand. This action doesn't end any stance or fighter feat efiect that requires you to have 
one hand free.
IMPROVED BRUTISH SHOVE FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Brutish Shove
When you use Brutish Shove, you can use it against a creature up to one size larger than 
you, and you get to choose whether the target is pushed or becomes flat-footed.
 QUICK REVERSAL FEAT 4
 Requirements 
You are flanked by at least two enemies.
You turn your foes' flanking against them with a quick attack and reverse. 
Make a melee weapon Strike against one of the flanking enemies; it has the 
following failure efiect.
Failure
 Make a second Strike with the same weapon against a different enemy who is 
flanking you. This second Strike has the same multiple attack penalty of the initial 
attack and doesn't count toward your multiple attack penalty. 
 SWIPE FEAT 4
 Make a melee Strike and compare the attack roll to the AC of up to two 
foes, each of whom must be within your melee reach and adjacent to each 
other. Roll damage only once, and apply it to each creature you hit. If you critically hit 
one target and not the other, roll the extra critical hit damage separately. A Swipe counts 
as two attacks for your multiple attack penalty.
 TWIN PARRY FEAT 4
 Requirements 
You are wielding two melee weapons, one in each hand.
You use your two weapons to parry attacks. If neither weapon is agile or if either weapon 
has the parry trait, you gain a +2 circumstance bonus to AC until the start of your next 
turn. Otherwise, you gain a +1 circumstance bonus to AC until the start of your next turn 
instead. You lose the circumstance bonus if you no longer meet the requirement.
6TH LEVEL
EXOTIC WEAPON TRAINING FEAT 6
 Choose an exotic weapon when you gain this feat. You gain trained 
proficiency with that exotic weapon and access to its critical specialization effects as if it 
were a martial weapon in its weapon group.
 IMPROVED BRAVERY FEAT 6
 Trigger
 Your turn ends.
Reduce your frightened condition by 2, rather than 1.
 REVEALING STAB FEAT 6
 Requirements 
You are wielding a melee weapon that deals piercing damage.
You drive your piercing weapon into an imperceptible foe, revealing its location to your 
allies. Make a Strike with the required melee weapon. You don't have to attempt a flat 
check to hit a concealed creature, and you have to succeed at only a DC 5 flat check to 
hit a sensed creature. The attack also gains the following enhancement.
FighterOpenFighterAttack
FighterPress
FighterOpenFighterFighterFighterFighterINCREASING WEAPON 
DAMAGE DICE
When an efiect calls on you to increase 
your weapon damage dice, instead of 
using its normal weapon damage dice, 
you use the next larger die (so if you were 
using a d4, you'd use a d6, and so on). If 
you are already using a d12, you continue 
to use a d12 and gain a +2 circumstance 
bonus to damage rolls instead. You can 
never increase your weapon damage 
dice more than once. The following is 
the progression for increasing weapon 
damage dice. 1d4 —> 1d6 —> 1d8 —> 1d10 —> 1d12 —>  +2 circumstance bonus to damage rolls
Feat
Level
Savage Critical
18 Shatter Defenses
6 Shield Paragon12 Shield Warden
6 Shielded Stride6 Slippery Shooter8 Spring Attack
12STance Savant
14 Sudden Charge1 Sudden Leap
8 Swipe
4 Triple Shot
6 Twin Paragon
16 Twin Parry
4 Twin Riposte
10 Two-Weapon Flurry
14 Unyielding Fortitude
10 Weapon Supremacy
20 Whirlwind Strike1492 Enhancement You can choose to drive the required weapon 
into a corporeal target, revealing its current position. Once 
the weapon successfully Strikes the target, it lodges into the 
target. You cease wielding the weapon, and as long as the 
weapon is lodged into the target, the target is immobilized. 
If the target is concealed, other creatures don't need to 
succeed at a flat check to hit it. If the target is sensed, other 
creatures have to succeed at only a DC 5 flat check to hit 
the target. If the target is unseen, other creatures can still 
attempt to hit it by attacking the space where they see your 
weapon and succeeding at a DC 11 flat check.
The efiect of this enhancement lasts until the weapon is removed 
from the creature. An adjacent creature or the target can remove 
the weapon with an Interact action.
 SHATTER DEFENSES FEAT 6
 Requirements 
The target is frightened and you are 
wielding a melee weapon.
When you attack a foe aflicted by fear, your blow 
knocks the foe ofi-balance. Make a Strike with the required 
weapon against the required target. That Strike gains the 
following enhancement and failure efiect.
Enhancement The foe becomes flat-footed until the end of 
your next turn. If the target is already flat-footed, it instead 
becomes sluggish 1 until the end of your next turn as long 
as it remains flat-footed.
Failure
 The foe becomes flat-footed until the start of your 
next turn. If the target is already flat-footed, it instead 
becomes sluggish 1 until the start of your next turn as long 
as it remains flat-footed.
SHIELD WARDEN FEAT 6
 You use your shield to protect your allies as well as 
yourself. When you are using a shield and you have that shield 
raised, you can trigger your Shield Block reaction when an attack 
is made against an ally adjacent to you. If you do, the shield 
prevents the ally from taking damage instead of protecting you. 
Apart from these alterations, this follows the normal rules for a 
Shield Block. SHIELDED STRIDE FEAT 6
 If your shield is raised, your enemies can't touch 
you. When you have your shield raised (due to the Raise a 
Shield action), you can Stride to move half your Speed without 
triggering Attacks of Opportunity or other reactions triggered 
by your movement. You can use Shielded Stride while Flying 
or Swimming instead of Striding if you have the corresponding 
movement type.
TRIPLE SHOT FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 Double ShotWhen you use Double Shot, you can make the attacks against 
the same target. You can add an additional action to Double Shot 
to make three ranged Strikes instead of two. If you do, each 
attack takes a –4 penalty; apply the usual multiple attack penalty 
only after the third Strike.
Attack
FighterPress
FighterFighterFighter8TH LEVEL
 DUELING RIPOSTE FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Dueling ParryRequirements 
You are benefiting from Dueling Parry.
Trigger
 An opponent within your reach critically fails a Strike 
against you.
You riposte against your flailing enemy. Make a melee Strike or 
Disarm action against the triggering opponent. FELLING STRIKE FEAT 8
 Requirements
 The target is flying and you are 
wielding a two-handed melee weapon.
Make a Strike with the following enhancement.
Enhancement The target falls up to 120 feet. The fall is gradual enough that if it causes the target to hit the ground, the 
target takes no damage from the fall. If the attack is a 
critical hit, the target can't fly, jump, levitate, or otherwise 
leave the ground until the end of your next turn.
 INCREDIBLE AIM FEAT 8
 Requirements 
You are wielding a ranged weapon.
Make a Strike with the required weapon. You 
ignore the concealed condition and the screened condition with 
this attack and reduce the target's bonus to AC from cover by 2. 
If the target is not benefiting from any of those effects, you gain 
a +2 circumstance bonus to the attack roll instead.
 POSITIONING ASSAULT FEAT 8
 Requirements
 You are wielding a two-handed 
melee weapon, and you are adjacent to your target.
With punishing blows, you nudge your opponent 
into position. Make a Strike. It gains the following enhancement 
and failure efiect.
Enhancement Choose a square that is adjacent to both you 
and your target. Your target either must move so that its 
space is in that square and still adjacent to you or take 
additional damage equal to your Strength modifier. The 
target chooses between these effects.
Failure
 The target is flat-footed until the start of your next turn.
QUICK SHIELD BLOCK FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Reactive Shield
At the start of each of your turns, you gain an additional reaction 
that you can use only to Shield Block.
 SLIPPERY SHOOTER FEAT 8
 Your shots are nimble and deadly. While you're 
in this stance, your ranged Strikes don't trigger 
Attacks of Opportunity or other reactions that are 
triggered by a ranged attack. Furthermore, you can use Attacks 
of Opportunity with a loaded ranged weapon you're wielding, 
treating it as having a range of 5 feet when you do.
SUDDEN LEAP FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Sudden ChargeFighterFighterConcentrate
FighterAttack
FighterPress
FighterFighter 
OpenStanceFighter93 When making a Sudden Charge, instead of Striding, you can 
Leap. If you succeed at an Athletics check when you Leap, you 
can move the same distance you could with a Long Jump. Even 
if you're Leaping vertically, you determine the DC for the height 
you're jumping using the DC of a Long Jump.
After your Strike, you fall to the ground if you're in the air. If 
the distance of your fall is no more than the height of your jump, 
you take no damage and land upright.
If you have Felling Strike and meet its requirements, you can 
add an extra action to the Sudden Charge activity to add Felling 
Strike's enhancement to the Strike made after your Leap.
10TH LEVEL
AGILE GRACE FEAT 10

Your graceful moves with agile weapons are 
almost superhuman. Your multiple attack penalty with 
agile weapons and agile unarmed attacks becomes –3 after 
the first attack and –6 after the second, rather than –4 and 
–8, respectively.
BLINDflFIGHT FEAT 10

Prerequisites
 Master Perception
You are more aware of concealed and invisible enemies. If you 
are adjacent to an unseen creature of your level or lower, you 
treat it as sensed. When you are adjacent to a sensed creature, 
you treat it as concealed. When adjacent to a concealed 
creature, you treat it as though it weren't concealed.
 CERTAIN STRIKE FEAT 10

Even when you don't hit squarely, but you likely 
still score a glancing blow. Make a melee Strike. It 
gains the following failure efiect.
Failure
 Your attack deals its minimum damage. (Treat this as 
though you had rolled a 1 on every damage die.)
COMBAT REFLEXES FEAT 10

At the start of each turn, you gain an additional 
reaction that can be used only to make an Attack of Opportunity.
 DEBILITATING SHOT FEAT 10

Requirements
 You are wielding a ranged 
weapon.
Your follow-up shots can slow down a foe. 
Make a ranged Strike with the required weapon. It gains 
the following enhancement and failure efiect.
Enhancement The target is slowed 1 until the start of 
your next turn.
Failure
 The target is flat-footed until the start of your 
next turn.
 DISRUPTIVE FEAT 10

The slightest distraction can provoke your 
wrath. As long as you are in this stance, 
you don't take the normal –2 penalty when 
you make an Attack of Opportunity. Your Attack of 
FighterFighterAttack
FighterPress
FighterAttack
FighterPress
Fighter 
Open 
StanceOpportunity is triggered when a creature within your reach uses 
an action that has the concentrate trait.
 MIRROR SHIELD FEAT 10

Requirements
 You have a shield raised.
Trigger
 An opponent critically fails a ranged touch attack 
against you.
You reflect the attack back against the triggering opponent. Make 
a ranged touch attack against the triggering creature. Regardless 
of your normal proficiency, you are untrained with this attack. If 
your attack succeeds, your opponent takes the normal damage 
for a success (though any saving throws or other defenses apply). 
If your ranged touch attack is a critical hit, that target is critically 
hit by the attack.
Fighter94 TWIN RIPOSTE FEAT 10

Requirements
 You are benefiting from the Twin 
Parry action. Trigger
 An opponent within your reach critically fails at a Strike 
against you.
Your clever parry with one weapon leaves your opponent open 
to an attack with the other weapon. Make a melee Strike or use 
a Disarm action against the triggering opponent. UNYIELDING FORTITUDE FEAT 10

Prerequisites
 Expert Fortitude
You become a master at Fortitude saves. When you succeed at a 
Fortitude save, treat it as a critical success.
12TH LEVEL
 BRUTAL FINISH FEAT 12

Prerequisites
 master proficiency with a two-
handed melee weapon
Requirements
 You are wielding a two-handed 
weapon with which you have master proficiency rank.
Make a Strike with the required weapon. It gains the following 
enhancement and failure efiect. After the Strike, your turn ends.
Enhancement You deal an extra die of damage.
Failure
 You deal damage equal to your Strength modifier.
 DESPERATE FINISHER FEAT 12

Requirement
 You have not used a reaction during 
your turn, and you are able to use an action with the press trait.
Trigger
 You complete the last action on your turn.
You throw everything into one last press. You forgo the ability to 
use reactions until the start of your next turn and use one action 
that you know with the press trait as part of Desperate Finisher. 
 DUELING DANCE FEAT 12

Prerequisites
 Dueling ParryRequirements 
You are wielding only a single one-
handed melee weapon and have your other hand 
or hands free.
Using your free hand as pivot and balance, you both attack 
and defend with your weapon. While in this stance, you 
constantly gain the benefits of Dueling Parry as long as you 
meet its requirements.
IMPROVED DUELING RIPOSTE FEAT 12

At the start of each of your turns, you gain an 
additional reaction that you can use only with Dueling Riposte. 
If you are not benefiting from Dueling Parry, you can use your 
normal reaction in addition to this Dueling Riposte reaction.
 INCREDIBLE FOLLOWflUP FEAT 12

Prerequisites
 Incredible Aim
Requirements 
You are wielding a ranged weapon.
Make a Strike with the required weapon. You 
ignore the concealed condition, the screened condition, and the 
target's cover.
FighterFighterAttack
FighterPress
FighterFighterOpenStanceFighterConcentrate
FighterPress
 REELING BLOW FEAT 12

Requirements
 You are wielding a two-handed 
melee weapon.
With a follow-up clobber, you knock your opponent 
silly. Make a Strike with the required weapon. It gains the 
following enhancement and failure efiect.
Enhancement Your target is pushed up to 10 feet away from 
you and is flat-footed until the start of your next turn.
Failure
 The target is flat-footed until the start of your next turn.
 SHIELD PARAGON FEAT 12

Requirements
 You are wielding a shield.
Your shield is always ready. While in this stance, you 
constantly have your shield raised, as if you'd used 
the Raise a Shield action, as long as you meet its requirements.
 SPRING ATTACK FEAT 12

Requirements
 You are adjacent to an enemy.
Springing away from one foe, you Strike at another. 
Stride up to your Speed, but you must end that 
movement within melee reach of a different enemy. 
When that movement is over, make a melee Strike against an 
enemy now within reach. You can use Spring Attack while 
Burrowing, Climbing, Flying, or Swimming instead of Striding if 
you have the corresponding movement type.
14TH LEVEL
 DETERMINATION FEAT 14

Frequency
 A number of times per day equal to 
your Charisma modifier (minimum 1).
Your training allows you to shrug ofi your foe's spells and 
conditions when the need is dire. Choose a single nonpermanent 
spell or basic condition that is afiecting you. If you chose a basic 
condition, its efiect on you ends. If you chose a spell, attempt to 
counteract the spell (the counteract level is equal to half your 
level rounded up, and a bonus on the check equal to your level 
plus your key ability modifier). If your counteract attempt is 
successful, the direct efiect on you ends. 
This doesn't prevent any Hit Point damage normally dealt by 
the efiect or prevent the spell or debilitating efiect from afiecting 
other allies or the environment around you, nor does it remove 
an ongoing afliction or prevent it from inflicting conditions on 
you later. If the efiect comes from a creature, hazard, or item 
whose level is 20th or higher, Determination can't remove its 
efiect on you.
 GUIDING FINISH FEAT 14

Requirements
 You are wielding a one-handed 
weapon and have the other hand free.
By shifting your weight and angling your weapon, 
you guide your opponent right where you want them. Make a 
Strike with the required weapon. That Strike gains the following 
enhancement and failure efiect.
Enhancement Move the target up to 10 feet, but it must end 
its movement within melee reach of you.
Attack
FighterPress
FighterOpenStanceAttack
FighterMove
Press
Concentrate
FighterAttack
FighterPress
95 Failure
 Move the target up to 5 feet, but it must end the move 
within melee reach of you.
GUIDING RIPOSTE FEAT 14

Prerequisites
 Improved Dueling Riposte
By shifting your weight and angling your weapon, you guide your 
opponents to right where you want them. When you use Dueling 
Riposte to make a Strike, it gains the following enhancement.
Enhancement You can move the triggering opponent up to 10 
feet, but the move must end within melee reach of you.
IMPROVED TWIN RIPOSTE FEAT 14

At the start of each of your turns, you gain an 
additional reaction that you can use only to perform a Twin Riposte. 
If you aren't benefiting from Twin Parry, you can use your normal 
reaction in addition to this Twin Riposte reaction. 
 KNOCKDOWN FEAT 14

Make a melee Strike. It gains the following 
enhancement. Enhancement As long as the target is no more than one size  
larger than you, it is knocked prone. If you are using a two-
handed weapon, the target can be up to two size categories 
larger than you and be knocked prone.
REFLEXIVE SHIELD FEAT 14

When you raise your shield, you gain your shield's 
circumstance bonus to Reflex saves, and damage you take as a 
result of a Reflex save can trigger your Shield Block, even if it 
isn't physical damage.
 STANCE SAVANT FEAT 14

Trigger
 You roll initiative.
You enter a stance without a thought. You use an action with the 
stance trait. TWOflWEAPON FLURRY FEAT 14

Requirements
 You are wielding two weapons, each 
in a different hand. Your multiple attack penalty 
with both weapons is –8 or worse.
Strike twice, once with each weapon. These do not count toward 
the multiple attack penalty until the second Strike.
 WHIRLWIND STRIKE FEAT 14

You attack all adversaries who are near. Make 
a melee Strike against each enemy within your 
melee reach. Each attack counts toward your 
multiple attack penalty, but do not increase your penalty until 
you have made all your attacks.
16TH LEVEL
 GRACEFUL POISE FEAT 16

Prerequisites
 Double SliceWith the right positioning, your ofi-hand weapon 
can strike like a scorpion's stinger. While in this stance, if you 
FighterFighterFighterFighterFighterAttack
FighterPress
Attack
FighterOpenFighterStancemake your second Strike from Double Slice with an agile weapon 
or agile unarmed attack, it doesn't count toward your multiple 
attack penalty for the turn.
IMPROVED REFLEXIVE SHIELD FEAT 16

Prerequisites
 Reflexive Shield
Your shield can help save nearby allies. When you use Reflexive 
Shield, adjacent allies who have to attempt the triggering Reflex 
save also gain its efiect.
 MULTISHOT PARAGON FEAT 16

Prerequisites
 Triple Shot
Requirements
 You are wielding a ranged weapon 
with 0 reload.
While in this stance, your penalty for Double Shot is reduced to 
–1, or –2 if you add the extra action to make three Strikes. If you 
move from your position, this stance ends.
 TWIN PARAGON FEAT 16

Prerequisites
 Twin Parry
Requirements
 You are wielding two melee 
weapons, one in each hand.
You're always ready to use your ofi-hand weapon to interfere 
with attacks against you. While in this stance, you constantly 
gain the benefits of the Twin Parry action.
18TH LEVEL
 IMPOSSIBLE VOLLEY FEAT 18

Requirements
 You are wielding a ranged weapon 
with the volley trait and reload 0.
You fire a volley at all foes in an area. Make a Strike with a 
–5 penalty against all enemies within a 10-foot-radius burst; 
this burst must be centered at or beyond your weapon's 
volley range. 
SAVAGE CRITICAL FEAT 18

The wounds you inflict are more grievous. When 
you Strike with a weapon or unarmed attack for which you have 
a proficiency rank of legendary, you critically succeed with an 
attack roll of 19 or 20, as long as the attack would hit on that 
result. This doesn't make a natural 19 automatically hit.
20TH LEVEL
REACTIONARY FEAT 20

With a sixth sense for the flow of combat, you 
can reaction to any situation as needed. You can use any of the 
additional reactions you've gained from fighter feats to use 
any reaction you've gained from a fighter class feature or feat, 
instead of just the reaction specified in the class feature or feat.
WEAPON SUPREMACY FEAT 20

Your skill with weapons lets you attack swiftly 
at all times. You're permanently quick. You can use your extra 
action only to Strike with a weapon.
FighterFighterOpenStanceFighterOpenStanceFighterFighterFighterFighter96
The strength of the fist flows from the power of mind and spirit. You seek 
to attain perfection—to hone your body into a flawless instrument and 
your mind into an orderly bastion of wisdom. You are a fierce combatant 
renowned for your martial arts skills and your ability to enter stances 
to achieve different outcomes during a fight. While the challenges of 
mastering fighting styles and conquering powerful foes drive you to 
greater and greater heights, you also enjoy meditating on philosophical 
questions and discovering new ways to obtain peace and enlightenment. 
MONK97 KEY ABILITYDexterity or Strength
HIT POINTS10 plus your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
PERCEPTION
Trained in Perception
SAVING THROWSExpert in Fortitude, Reflex, and Will
SKILLS
Trained in a number of skills equal to 
 3 plus your Intelligence modifier.
WEAPONS
Trained in all unarmed attacks
ARMORUntrained in all armorSIGNATURE SKILLS
Acrobatics
Athletics
Religion
PLAYING A MONK
Players of monk characters might approach gameplay in the following ways:
Ł During combat, you speed into the fray, dodging or leaping past obstacles with 
acrobatic maneuvers. You strike opponents in a rapid flurry of attacks, using bare 
fists or wielding specialized weapons that you mastered during your monastic 
training. Stances let you change up your combat style for different situations, and ki 
abilities allow you to heal yourself or soar through the air. 

Ł During social encounters, your perceptiveness lets you see through falsehoods, and your 
philosophical training provides insight into any situation.

Ł In exploration mode, you climb up walls, dodge traps, overcome obstacles, and 
leap over pits. You usually stay toward the outside of the group to protect more 
vulnerable members, and you're suited to looking for danger or moving stealthily.

Ł In downtime mode, you diligently exercise, eat healthy foods, meditate, and study 
philosophies. You might also take up a craft that you strive to perfect.
ROLEPLAYING A MONK
Seldom seen outside their monasteries, monks have a reputation as powerful 
but taciturn warriors. IF YOU'RE A MONK, YOU LIKELY...

Ł Maintain a regimen of physical training and meditation.

Ł Face adversity with a calm and measured approach, never panicking or succumbing 
to despair.

Ł Look to the future for ways you can improve while remaining at peace with your 
present self.
OTHERS PROBABLY...

Ł Think you're more than a bit uptight, with your vows and rules.

Ł Marvel at your feats of physical prowess.

Ł Come to you for philosophical instruction.
CLASS FEATURES
You gain these abilities as a monk. Abilities gained at higher levels list the 
requisite levels next to the features' names. 
FLURRY
 OF BLOWSYou can attack rapidly with your fists. You gain the Flurry of Blows action.
 FLURRY OF BLOWS
Frequency
 Once per round.
Make two unarmed Strikes. If both hit the same creature, combine their damage and 
enhancements for the purpose of resistances and weaknesses.
GRACEFUL
 EXPERTISEYour unarmored defense proficiency rank is expert.
POWERFUL
 FISTWhen striking with your fist, you deal 1d6 damage instead of 1d4. You use your 
normal proficiency when making a lethal attack with a nonlethal unarmed attack. MONK FEATSAt 1st level and every even-numbered level thereafter, you gain a monk class 
feat (see page 99).SKILL FEATS 2ND
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill feat. Skill feats are listed 
Monk98 TABLE 3–14: MONK ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level
Class Features
1 Ancestry feat, background, flurry of blows, 
graceful expertise, initial proficiencies, monk feat, 
powerful fist
2 Monk feat, skill feat
3 General feat, incredible movement 10 feet, magic 
strikes, skill increase
4 Monk feat, skill feat
5 Ability boosts, ancestry feat, metal strikes, skill 
increase
6 Incredible movement 15 feet, monk feat, skill feat
7 General feat, path to perfection, skill increase
8 Monk feat, skill feat
9 Ancestry feat, fierce flurry, incredible movement 20 
feet, skill increase
10 Ability boosts, monk feat, skill feat
11 General feat, second path to perfection, skill increase
12 Incredible movement 25 feet, monk feat, skill feat
13 Ancestry feat, graceful mastery, skill increase, 
unarmed mastery14 Monk feat, skill feat
15 Ability boosts, general feat, incredible movement 
30 feet,  skill increase, third path to perfection
16 Monk feat, skill feat
17 Adamantine strikes, ancestry feat, graceful legend, 
skill increase
18 Incredible movement 35 feet, monk feat, skill feat
19 General feat, perfected form, skill increase
20 Ability boosts, monk feat, skill feat
in Chapter 5 and have the skill trait. You must be trained or 
better in the corresponding skill to select a skill feat. GENERAL FEATS 3RD
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a 
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.INCREDIBLE
 MOVEMENT
 3RD
You gain a +10-foot conditional bonus to your Speed 
whenever you're not wearing armor. The bonus increases 
by 5 feet for every 3 monk levels you have beyond 3rd. MAGIC
 STRIKES 3RD
Your proficiency rank for unarmed attacks increases to 
expert. Your unarmed attacks become magical, allowing 
them to bypass resistances accordingly. You still need an 
item such as handwraps of mighty fists to gain a bonus to 
attack rolls or increase your attacks' weapon damage dice. SKILL
 INCREASES 3RD
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a 
skill increase. You can use this increase to either become 
trained in one skill you're untrained in, or to become an 
expert in one skill in which you're already trained. If you are at least 7th level, you can use this increase to become a master in a signature skill in which you're already an expert. If you are at least 15th level, you can use this increase to become legendary in a signature skill in which you're already a master.
ABILITY BOOSTS 5TH
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four 
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to 
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability 
score increases it by 1 if it's already 18 or above or by 2 if 
it starts out below 18.ANCESTRY FEATS 5TH
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain 
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter. 
The list of ancestry feats available to you can be found in 
your ancestry's entry in Chapter 2.
METAL
 STRIKES 5TH
Your unarmed attacks are treated as cold iron and silver.
PATH TO PER
FECTION
 7TH
Choose your Fortitude, Reflex, or Will saving throw. Your 
proficiency rank in the chosen saving throw increases 
to master.
FIERCE FLURRY 9TH
If you hit with both Strikes in a Flurry of Blows, increase 
the weapon damage dice of each attack by one step. SECOND
 PATH
 TO
 PER
FECTION
 11TH
If you succeed at a saving throw in which your proficiency 
rank is master, you instead critically succeed.
GRACEFUL MASTERY 13TH
Your unarmored defense proficiency rank becomes master.
UNARMED MASTERY 13TH
Your unarmed attack proficiency rank becomes master.
THIRD PATH TO
 PER
FECTION
 15TH
Choose your Fortitude, Reflex, or Will saving throw. If 
your proficiency rank for the chosen type of save is master, 
it increases to legendary; otherwise, it increases to master.
ADAMANTINE
 STRIKES 17TH
Your unarmed attacks are treated as adamantine.
GRACEFUL LEGEND 17TH
Your unarmored defense proficiency becomes legendary.
PERFECTED FORM 19TH
When you make an unarmed Strike, you can treat any 
dice whose roll was lower than 10 as if you had rolled 
a 10. If you do, your Strike gains the fortune trait.19th99 MONK FEATS
Every level at which you gain a monk feat, select one of the following feats. 
You must satisfy any prerequisites before taking the feat.
1ST LEVEL
 CRANE STANCE FEAT 1
 Requirement 
You are unarmored.
You enter the stance of a crane, standing on one leg while folding your arms 
in an imitation of a crane's wings. You gain a +1 circumstance bonus to AC, but 
the only Strikes you can make are crane wing attacks. These deal 1d6 bludgeoning damage; 
are in the brawling group; and have the agile, finesse, nonlethal, and unarmed traits.
While in Crane Stance, you gain a +4 conditional bonus on Athletics checks to jump, and 
when you Leap, you can move an additional 5 feet horizontally or 2 feet vertically.
 DRAGON STANCE FEAT 1
 Requirement 
You are unarmored.
You enter the stance of a dragon and make powerful leg strikes like a lashing 
dragon's tail. You can make dragon tail attacks. These deal 1d10 bludgeoning 
damage; are in the brawling group; and have the backswing, nonlethal, and unarmed traits.
While in Dragon Stance, you gain a +1 conditional bonus to saving throws against 
paralysis and sleep, and you can ignore difficult terrain while Striding.
KI STRIKE FEAT 1
 By tapping into a supernatural inner reserve called ki, you can make your 
unarmed Strikes more powerful. You gain a pool of Spell Points with a capacity equal to 
your Wisdom modifier. You gain the 
ki strike ki power (see page 234). This power is a type of 
special spell you can cast by spending Spell Points. Powers are explained on pages 193–194.
Other feats can give you other ki powers you can cast by spending Spell Points. You're 
trained in spell rolls and spell DCs for your ki powers, and your spell rolls and spell DCs use 
your Wisdom modifier. When you use Ki Strike, choose whether your ki powers are divine 
spells or occult spells. MONASTIC WEAPONRY FEAT 1
 You gain access to uncommon weapons with the monk trait, and become 
proficient in simple and martial monk weapons. Your proficiency rank for these weapons 
matches your proficiency rank for unarmed attacks, and you can use melee monk 
weapons with any of your monk feats or monk abilities that normally require unarmed 
attacks, though you can't use these weapons if a monk feat or ability requires you to use 
a single specific attack, such as Crane Stance.
 STUNNING FIST FEAT 1
 Make an unarmed Strike. It gains the following enhancement.
Enhancement The target must attempt a Fortitude save against your class 
DC. If the target fails, it's flat-footed for 1 round. On a critical failure, it's also stupefied 2 for 
1 round. If your attack was a critical success, one of the following outcomes occurs: If the 
target succeeded at its save, it instead fails its save. If the target failed its save, it instead 
critically fails its save. If the target critically failed its save, it is instead stunned for 1 round.
 TIGER STANCE FEAT 1
 Requirement 
You are unarmored.
You enter the stance of a tiger, using your hands like claws. You can make tiger 
claw attacks. These deal 1d8 slashing damage; are in the brawling group; and 
have the agile, finesse, nonlethal, and unarmed traits. They gain the following enhancement.
Enhancement On a critical success, the target takes 1d4 persistent bleed damage. While in Tiger Stance, you can Step 10 feet as long as your Speed is at least 10 feet.
MonkOpenStanceMonkOpenStanceMonkMonkConcentrate
MonkMonkOpenStanceKEY TERMSYou'll see the following key terms in many 
monk abilities. Enhancements: Enhancements are 
additional effects applied to a Strike. If your Strike doesn't deal damage, 
any enhancements do not apply. Some 
enhancements also require that you 
critically succeed against your opponent 
in order to apply the enhancement.
Open: Actions with this trait allow you 
to prepare your next Strike or have you 
enter a stance, and sometimes do both. You 
can use an action with the open trait only if 
you haven't used an action with the attack 
or open trait yet this turn.
Stance: A stance is a general combat 
strategy that you enter by using an action 
with the stance trait. You can enter a stance 
only in encounter mode. A stance lasts until 
you get knocked out, until its requirements 
(if any) are violated, or until you enter a new 
stance, whichever comes first.
100 MONK FEATS
If you need to look up a monk feat by 
name instead of by level, use this table.
Feat
Level
Abundant Step6 Arrow Snatching
8 Brawling Focus
4 Crane Flutter6 Crane Stance1 Crushing Grab4 Dancing Leaf
4 DEffect Arrow
4 Diamond Fists18 Diamond Soul12 Disrupt Ki12 Dragon Roar
6 Dragon Stance1 Empty Body18 Enduring Quickness20 Enlightened Presence
16 Flying Kick4 Ghost Strike6 Guarded Movement
4 Impossible Technique
20 Improved Knockback
12 Ki Blast6 Ki Strike1 Knockback Strike10 Master of Many Styles16 Monastic Weaponry
1 Monk's Evasion
8 Mountain Root Quake
14 Mountain Root Stance
8 Quivering Palm
16 Shattering Strike
16 Sleeper Hold10STance Savant
12STunning Fist1 Swift River
18 Tangled Forest Rake
14 Tangled Forest Stance
8 Tiger Slash6 Tiger Stance1 Timeless Body14 Tongue of Sun and Moon
14 Wall Run
8 Whirling Throw
6 Wholeness of Body4 Wild Winds Gust14 Wild Winds Stance8 Wind Jump10 Wind Step6 Winding Path
10 Wolf Drag
6 Wolf Stance
1 WOLF STANCE FEAT 1
 Requirement 
You are unarmored.
You enter the stance of a wolf, low to the ground with your hands held 
like fanged teeth. You can make wolf jaw unarmed attacks. These deal 1d8 
piercing damage, are in the brawling group, and are agile, finesse, nonlethal, and unarmed.
While in Wolf Stance, your wolf jaw unarmed attacks also gain the forceful trait if 
you're flanking the target.
4TH LEVELBRAWLING FOCUS FEAT 4
 You gain access to the critical specialization effects of weapons of the 
brawling group.
CRUSHING GRAB FEAT 4
 When you successfully Grapple a creature, you can deal bludgeoning 
damage to that creature equal to your Strength modifier. You can choose whether to 
treat this attack as nonlethal.
DANCING LEAF FEAT 4
 When you Leap or succeed at a High Jump or Long Jump, increase the 
distance you jump by 5 feet. When you fall, don't count any distance fallen while you are 
adjacent to a wall when calculating the damage from the fall.
 DEffect ARROW FEAT 4
 Trigger
 A ranged weapon attack hits you, but doesn't critically hit you.
Requirements
 You're aware of the attack but not flat-footed against it, and have a 
hand free.
You gain a +4 circumstance bonus to AC against the triggering attack. If this would 
cause the attack to be a failure, you dEffect the arrow and the attack misses you.
 FLYING KICK FEAT 4
 Frequency 
Once per round.
Make a Leap or attempt a Long Jump. At the end of the jump, if you're adjacent to a foe, 
you can immediately Strike that foe.
GUARDED MOVEMENT FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Monk 4 You gain a +2 circumstance bonus to AC against reactions triggered by or during actions 
with the move trait that you use.
WHOLENESS OF BODY FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Ki StrikeTapping into your ki, you restore your own health. You gain the 
wholeness of body
 ki MonkOpenStanceMonkMonkMonkMonkMonkMonkMonkTABLE 3–15: MONK ATTACKS
Unarmed Attack
DamageGroup
Traits
Crane wing1d6 BBrawling
Agile, finesse, nonlethal, unarmedDragon tail1d10 BBrawling
Backswing, nonlethal, unarmedTiger claw
1d8 SBrawling
Agile, finesse, nonlethal, unarmedWolf jaw
1d8 PBrawling
Agile, finesse, nonlethal, unarmedWind crash (see wild 
winds stance, page 272)1d4 SBrawling
Agile, nonlethal, propulsive, unarmed
Falling stone
1d8 BBrawling
Forceful, nonlethal, unarmed
Lashing branch1d8 SBrawling
Agile, finesse, nonlethal, unarmed101power (see page 272), which you can cast by spending 2 Spell 
Points. Increase your Spell Point pool by 2.
6TH LEVEL
ABUNDANT STEP FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 Ki StrikeYou can teleport yourself a short distance. You gain the 
dimensional steps ki power (see page 215), which you can cast 
by spending 1 Spell Point. Increase your Spell Point pool by 2.
 CRANE FLUTTER FEAT 6
 Prerequisites 
Crane StanceRequirements 
You are in Crane Stance.
Trigger
 You are targeted with a melee attack by an attacker you see.
You gain a +2 circumstance bonus to AC against the triggering 
attack. If it misses you, you can immediately make a crane wing 
Strike against the attacker at a –4 penalty, even if the attacker isn't 
in your reach. This Strike does not incur a multiple attack penalty.
 DRAGON ROAR FEAT 6
 Prerequisites 
Dragon StanceRequirements 
You are in Dragon Stance.
You bellow, instilling fear in your enemies. Enemies that you're 
aware of within a 15-foot aura must succeed at a Will save 
against your Intimidation DC or be frightened 1. A creature that 
critically fails is also fleeing for 1 round. A creature frightened in 
this way can't reduce its frightened value below 1 on any turn it 
begins adjacent to you. All creature are bolstered.
Your first attack that hits a frightened creature after you roar 
gains a +4 circumstance bonus to damage. This extra damage 
must be triggered before the end of your next turn or it's lost.
After you use this action, you can't use it again for 1d4 rounds. 
All its effects end immediately if you leave Dragon Stance.
 GHOST STRIKE FEAT 6
 Make an unarmed Strike against the target's TAC.
KI BLAST FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 Ki StrikeYou can unleash an impactful cone of force by 
channeling your ki. You gain the 
ki blast
 ki power (see page 234), which you can cast by 
spending 2 Spell Points. Increase your Spell 
Point pool by 2.
 TIGER SLASH FEAT 6
 Prerequisites 
Tiger StanceRequirements 
You are in Tiger Stance.
You make a fierce swipe with both hands. Make a tiger claw 
Strike. It deals 2 extra dice of damage (3 extra dice of damage 
if you're at least a 14th-level monk) and you can Shove the 
target 5 feet. This Strike counts as two attacks for the 
purpose of the multiple attack penalty. The Strike gains 
the following enhancement. 
Enhancement If the attack was a critical success, 
MonkMonkMonkMonkMonkMonkadd your Strength modifier to the persistent bleed damage 
from tiger claw. 
 WHIRLING THROW FEAT 6
 Requirements
 You have a creature grabbed or 
restrained.
You propel your grabbed or restrained foe a great distance. 
Choose a distance in feet of up to 10 + 5 × your Strength modifier 
that you want to throw the creature. Attempt an Athletics check 
with a DC of 5 plus the total distance in feet you're trying to 
throw the creature. You take a –2 circumstance penalty to 
your check for every size the target is larger than you or a +2 
Monk102circumstance bonus to your check for every size the target is 
smaller than you. 
If you throw the creature, it takes bludgeoning damage equal 
to your Strength modifier plus 1d6 per 10 feet you threw it.
Success You throw the creature up to 10 feet.
Critical Success You throw the creature the desired distance.
Failure
 You don't throw the creature.
Critical Failure
 You don't throw the creature, and it's no longer 
grabbed or restrained by you.
WIND STEP FEAT 6
 You can Stride across liquid and surfaces that 
can't support your weight. This benefit lasts only during your 
movement. If you end your movement on the surface, you fall in 
or it collapses as normal. WOLF DRAG FEAT 6
 Prerequisites 
Wolf Stance
Requirements 
You are in Wolf Stance.
You rip your enemy ofi their feet. Make a wolf jaw Strike. Your 
wolf jaw is fatal d12 for this Strike, and if the attack succeeds or 
critically succeeds, you knock the target prone.
8TH LEVEL
ARROW SNATCHING FEAT 8
 Prerequisite
 DEffect Arrow
When you successfully DEffect an Arrow, as part of 
that reaction you can immediately make a ranged Strike against 
the attacker using the projectile you dEffected. This is a thrown 
weapon with the same range increment as the triggering attack.
MONK'S EVASION FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Master Reflex
When you succeed at a Reflex save, treat it as a critical success. If 
you're 11th level or higher, when you fail at a Reflex save against 
an efiect that deals damage, you halve the damage you take.
 MOUNTAIN ROOT STANCE FEAT 8
 Trigger 
You are unarmored.
You enter the stance of an implacable mountain, 
striking with the weight of an avalanche. You can 
make falling stone unarmed attacks. These deal 1d8 bludgeoning 
damage; are in the brawling group; and have the forceful, 
nonlethal, and unarmed traits. While in Mountain Root Stance, you gain resistance 2 to all 
damage and get a +2 conditional bonus to any defenses against 
being Shoved or Tripped. At 14th level, the resistance increases to 3.
 TANGLED FOREST STANCE FEAT 8
 Trigger 
You are unarmored.
You extend your arms like gnarled branches to 
interfere with your foes' movements. You can 
make lashing branch unarmed attacks. These deal 1d8 slashing 
damage, are in the brawling group, and have the agile, finesse, 
nonlethal, and unarmed traits. MonkMonkAttack
MonkMonkMonkOpenStanceMonkOpenStanceWhile you're in Tangled Forest Stance and can act, every enemy 
in your reach that tries to move away from you must succeed 
at an Acrobatics or Athletics check against your class DC or be 
immobile for that action, free action, or reaction with the move trait 
(attempting this check is a free action).
 WALL RUN FEAT 8
STride up to your Speed. You must start your 
movement on a horizontal surface. During this movement, you can 
run up vertical surfaces like walls at your full Speed. If you end 
the Stride ofi the ground, you fall (though you can Grab an Edge if 
applicable). If you have Wind Step or a similar ability, Wall Run lets 
you run along vertical liquids or flimsy solids (such as a waterfall).
WILD WINDS STANCE FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Ki StrikeYou can enter a stance that lets you attack from a distance. You 
gain the wild winds stance ki power (see page 272), which you can 
use by spending 1 Spell Point. Increase your Spell Point pool by 1.
10TH LEVEL
 KNOCKBACK STRIKE FEAT 10

Make an unarmed Strike. If you hit, make an 
Athletics check to Shove the target. This attack 
uses the same multiple attack penalty as your Strike, and doesn't 
count toward your multiple attack penalty.
 SLEEPER HOLD FEAT 10

Requirements
 You have a creature grabbed or 
restrained.
Attempt an Athletics check to Grapple the creature.
Success The target is sluggish 1THrough its next turn.
Critical Success The target falls asleep for 1 minute, though it remains standing and doesn't drop what it holds.
WIND JUMP FEAT 10

Prerequisites
 Ki StrikeYou gather the wind beneath you, allowing you to fly as you jump. 
You gain the 
wind jump ki power (see page 272), which you can cast 
by spending 2 Spell Points. Increase your Spell Point pool by 2.
 WINDING PATH FEAT 10

Frequency 
once per round
You use two of the following actions in any order: Stand, Step, 
and Stride. You can't use the same action twice.
12TH LEVEL
DIAMOND SOUL FEAT 12

You gain a +1 conditional bonus to saving throws 
against magic. DISRUPT KI FEAT 12

Make an unarmed Strike with the following 
enhancement. MonkMonkConcentrate
MonkAttack
MonkMonkMonkMonkMonkNegative
103 Enhancement If the target is a living creature, you block its 
inner life force. It takes 2d4 persistent negative damage and 
is enfeebled 1 until the persistent damage ends. If you're 
18th level or higher, this deals 3d4 persistent negative 
damage instead. IMPROVED KNOCKBACK FEAT 12

When you successfully Shove a creature, increase 
the distance you push the creature and the distance you can 
move by 5 feet on a success or 10 feet on a critical success. If you 
push the target into an obstacle, it takes bludgeoning damage equal to your Strength modifier.
 STANCE SAVANT FEAT 12

Trigger 
You roll initiative.
You enter a stance without a thought. You use an action with 
the stance trait.14TH LEVEL
 MOUNTAIN ROOT QUAKE FEAT 14

Prerequisites 
Mountain Root Stance
Requirements 
You are in Mountain Root Stance and standing on 
the ground.
You stomp, shaking the earth beneath you. Creatures on the 
ground within a 20-foot aura must succeed at a Reflex save 
against your Athletics DC or take damage equal to your Strength 
modifier (minimum 0) and fall prone. A creature that critically fails 
takes double damage; one that succeeds takes half damage and 
doesn't fall prone, and one that critically succeeds is unafiected.
After you use this action, you can't use it again for 1d4 rounds.
 TANGLED FOREST RAKE FEAT 14

Prerequisites 
Tangled Forest Stance
Requirements 
You are in Tangled Forest Stance.
You move your foe as though it were traveling and lost in the 
woods, unable to escape. Make a lashing branch Strike with the 
following enhancement.
Enhancement You move the target up to 5 feet into a different 
square within your reach. If the target started on the 
ground, you can't move it ofi a clifi or into another place 
where it wouldn't be able to stand.
TIMELESS BODY FEAT 14

You cease aging. In addition, you gain a +2 conditional 
bonus to saves against toxins and resistance 5 to poison damage.
TONGUE OF SUN AND MOON FEAT 14

You can understand and speak all languages.
WILD WINDS GUST FEAT 14

Prerequisites
 Ki StrikeYou can cause swirling winds to bufiet your enemies in all 
directions. You gain the 
wild winds gust ki power (see page 272), 
which you can cast by spending 2 Spell Points. Increase your 
Spell Point pool by 2.
MonkMonkMonkMonkMonkMonkMonk16TH LEVEL
ENLIGHTENED PRESENCE FEAT 16

You and allies within 15 feet of you get a +1 
conditional bonus to Will saving throws.
 MASTER OF MANY STYLES FEAT 16

Prerequisites
 Stance Savant
Trigger
 Your turn begins.
You use an action with the stance trait.
QUIVERING PALM FEAT 16

Prerequisites
 Ki StrikeYour strikes can kill foes. You gain the 
quivering palm
 ki power 
(see page 249), which you can cast by spending 2 Spell Points. 
Increase your Spell Point pool by 2.
 SHATTERING STRIKE FEAT 16

Make an unarmed Strike. It bypasses the target's 
resistances. If the target has Hardness, you deal 2 Dents instead 
of one if you exceed its Hardness.
18TH LEVEL
DIAMOND FISTS FEAT 18

Your unarmed attacks become forceful. Any that 
were already forceful gain a +3 circumstance bonus to damage 
on the second attack on the same turn and a +5 circumstance 
bonus to damage on the third attack and further attacks.
EMPTY BODY FEAT 18

Prerequisites
 Ki StrikeYou transmute your body into an ethereal form. You gain the 
empty body ki power (see page 221), which you can cast by 
spending 2 Spell Points. Increase your Spell Point pool by 2.
 SWIFT RIVER FEAT 18

Trigger
 Your turn ends and you are hampered or 
slowed.
You remove the hampered or slowed condition. 
20TH LEVEL
ENDURING QUICKNESS FEAT 20

You're permanently quick. You can use your extra 
action to Stride or Leap, or to attempt a High Jump or Long Jump.
 IMPOSSIBLE TECHNIQUE FEAT 20

Requirements 
You are not armored or fatigued.
Trigger
 An enemy's attack hits you or you fail a saving throw 
against an enemy's ability.
If the triggering efiect was the enemy's attack hitting you, 
decrease the enemy's degree of success by one step. If the 
triggering efiect was you failing a saving throw, increase your 
degree of success by one step.
EmotionMentalMonkMonkMonkMonkMonkMonkMonkMonkMonk104 You are a champion of justice, a holy servant of a good and lawful deity 
who takes up the mantle of a restrictive code to provide certainty and 
hope to the innocent. You have powerful defenses that you share freely 
with your allies and innocent bystanders, but when the time comes to 
punish the wicked, you use your holy power to end the threat of evil. 
Your devotion also attracts the attention of holy spirits who aid you 
on your journey. Others can count on you to adhere to your code of 
conduct, and they trust you at your word. 
PALADIN
105 KEY ABILITYStrength
HIT POINTS10 plus your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
PERCEPTION 
Trained
SAVING THROWS Expert in Fortitude 
Trained in Reflex 
Expert in WillSKILLS 
Trained in a number of skills equal to 
4 plus your Intelligence modifier
WEAPONS
Trained in all simple and martial weapons
ARMOR 
Trained in all armor and shields
SIGNATURE SKILLS
Athletics
CraftingDiplomacyReligion
PLAYING A PALADIN
Players of paladin characters might approach gameplay in the following ways:
Ł During combat, you get into the enemy's face while carefully positioning yourself to 
protect your allies. 

Ł During social encounters, you are a voice of hope, striving to reach a peaceful 
solution that strengthens bonds and yields good results for all.

Ł In exploration mode, you overcome barriers both physical and spiritual, providing 
inspiration to your allies through your actions and guidance when requested, rather 
than sanctimoniously preaching about their shortcomings.

Ł In downtime mode, you spend much of your time on charity work and fulfilling the 
tenets of your code, but that doesn't mean there isn't time to take up a craft or hobby.
ROLEPLAYING A PALADIN
Paladins are champions of justice, acting as agents against the forces of evil. IF YOU'RE A PALADIN, YOU LIKELY...

Ł Believe there is always hope for good to triumph over evil, no matter how grim the odds.

Ł Know the ends don't justify the means, since evil acts increase the power of evil.

Ł Have a strong sense of justice and are incredibly frustrated when political corruption 
leads to a miscarriage of justice. OTHERS PROBABLY...

Ł Believe you an inflexible martinet devoted to every rule and unwilling to compromise.

Ł Worry you secretly despise them for not living up to your impossible standard.

Ł Assume you are forced to perform any favor free of charge in the name of charity.  

Ł See you as a symbol of hope, especially in a time of great need.

Ł Know that you've sworn an oath not to lie and that they can take you at your word.
CLASS FEATURES
You gain these abilities as a paladin. Abilities gained at higher levels list the 
requisite levels next to the features' names. CODE
 OF
 CONDUCT
Paladins are divine champions of a deity. You must be lawful good and worship 
a deity that allows lawful good clerics. See the list of deities on page 72.Actions fundamentally opposed to your deity's alignment or ideals are 
anathema to your faith. A few examples of acts that would be considered 
anathema appear in each deity's entry. You and your GM will determine 
whether other acts count as anathema. 
In addition, you must follow the paladin's code below. Deities often add 
additional strictures for their own paladins (for instance, Shelyn's paladins never 
attack first except to protect an innocent, and they choose and perfect an art form). 
If you stray from lawful good, perform acts anathema to your deity, or violate 
your code of conduct, you lose your Spell Point pool and righteous ally until 
you demonstrate your repentance by conducting an atone ritual (see page 275), but keep any other paladin abilities that don't require those class features.
The Paladin's Code
The following is the fundamental code all paladins follow. The tenets are listed 
in order of importance, starting with the most important. If a situation places 
two tenets in conflict, you aren't in a no-win situation; instead, follow the most 
important tenet. For instance, if an evil king asked you if innocent lawbreakers 
were hiding in your church so he could execute them, you could lie to him, since 
the tenet forbidding you to lie is less important than the tenet prohibiting the harm 
of an innocent. An attempt to subvert the paladin code by engineering a situation 
allowing you to use a higher tenet to ignore a lower tenet (telling someone that 
106 TABLE 3–16: PALADIN ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level
Class Features
1 Ancestry feat, background, champion powers, code of 
conduct, deific weapon, initial proficiencies, paladin 
feat, retributive strike
2 Paladin feat, skill feat
3 General feat, righteous ally, skill increase
4 Paladin feat, skill feat 
5 Ability boosts, ancestry feat, skill increase, weapon 
expertise
6 Paladin feat, skill feat
7 Armored fortitude, general feat, skill increase
8 Paladin feat, skill feat
9 Ancestry feat, holy smite, skill increase
10 Ability boosts, paladin feat, skill feat
11 Aura of justice, general feat, skill increase
12 Paladin feat, skill feat
13 Ancestry feat, armor mastery, skill increase
14 Paladin feat, skill feat
15 Ability boosts, general feat, skill increase, weapon mastery 
16 Paladin feat, skill feat
17 Ancestry feat, legendary armor, skill increase 
18 Paladin feat, skill feat
19 General feat, hero's defiance, skill increase
20 Ability boosts, paladin feat, skill feat
you won't respect lawful authorities so that the tenet of not 
lying supersedes the tenet of respecting lawful authorities, for 
example) is a violation of the paladin code.
Ł You must never willingly commit an evil act, such as murder, 
torture, or the casting an evil spell. 

Ł You must not use actions that you know will harm an innocent, 
or through inaction cause an innocent immediate harm when you 
knew your action could reasonably prevent it. This tenet doesn't 
force you to take action against possible harm to innocents or to 
sacrifice your life and potential to attempt to protect an innocent.

Ł You must act with honor, never cheating, lying, or taking 
advantage of others.

Ł You must respect the lawful authority of the legitimate ruler 
or leadership in whichever land you may be, following their 
laws unless they violate a higher tenet.
DEIFIC WEAPONIf your deity's favored weapon (see page 72) is uncommon, 
you gain access to it. If the weapon is simple, increase the 
damage die by one step when you wield it (d4 to d6, d6 to d8, d8 to d10, d10 to d12).RETRIBUTIVE
 S
TRIKE
As a paladin, you are a stalwart protector of those under 
your charge. You gain the Retributive Strike reaction.
 RETRIBUTIVE STRIKE
 Trigger 
A creature within your reach hits an ally or 
friendly creature.
PaladinMake a melee Strike against the triggering creature at a –2 penalty 
before the opponent rolls the damage for the triggering hit. If 
your attack hits, the target is enfeebled 1 for the remainder of its 
turn, or enfeebled 2 for the remainder of its turn if your Strike 
was a critical hit. The enfeebled condition ends immediately if 
the creature makes a Strike against you. If Retributive Strike 
incapacitates or kills the triggering creature, the triggering hit 
deals no damage. CHAM
PION POWER
SDivine power flows through you, and you have learned to channel it to heal others. This grants you special spells called champion powers. You gain a pool of Spell Points 
you can spend to cast champion powers. Your maximum 
number of Spell Points is equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum 0). You regain all your Spell Points when you 
prepare each day. Your key spellcasting ability score is 
Charisma, and you're trained in spell rolls and spell DCs for your champion powers. Your champion powers are 
divine spells. Champion powers are available only to paladins, and they 
can't be learned by other characters. They appear in the Spells 
chapter (page 192). Some paladin feats grant you additional 
champion powers, and such feats typically increase your 
pool of Spell Points. The spell level of each of your champion 
powers is equal to half your character level, rounded down, 
and produces heightened effects (see page 192) for those 
champion powers that have heightened entries. You gain the ability to cast the 
lay on hands champion 
power by spending 1 Spell Point. 
PALADIN FEATSAt 1st level and every even-numbered level thereafter, you 
gain a paladin class feat. Paladin class feats are described 
beginning on page 108.SKILL FEATS
 2ND
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill 
feat. Skill feats can be found in Chapter 5 and have the skill 
trait. You must be trained or better in the corresponding 
skill to select a skill feat. 
RIGHTEOUS ALLY
 3RD
Your devotion to the cause of good attracts the attention of 
a holy spirit to aid you on your journey. This spirit can take 
many forms, each granting you abilities and advantages. 
Once you have chosen the ally's form, it cannot be changed. 
The following are righteous allies:
Ł Blade Ally: A spirit of valor inhabits your weapon, granting 
it additional power. Select one weapon each morning when 
you make your daily preparations. In your hands, the 
weapon gains your choice of the 
disrupting, ghost touch, returning, or shifting property (see page 370), without 
it counting against the weapon's maximum number of 
properties. In addition, you gain access to the weapon's 
critical specialization efiect.
107
Ł Shield Ally: A spirit of dedication inhabits your shield, granting 
it additional benefits. In your hands, the shield increases its 
Hardness by 2 and gains the ability to take 2 additional Dents 
before becoming broken. This stacks with any extra Dents the 
shield can normally take.
Ł Steed Ally: You gain the service of a trained mount, 
which is treated as a young animal companion (see page 
284). Normally you can select only an animal companion 
with the mount special ability, such as a horse. At the 
GM's discretion, you can select a different type of animal 
companion appropriate to your ancestry and culture, but it 
doesn't gain the mount special ability. 
GENERAL FEATS 3RD
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a 
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.SKILL
 INCREASES 3RD
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a 
skill increase. You can use this increase to either become 
trained in one skill you're untrained in, or become an 
expert in one skill in which you're already trained. If you are at least 7th level, you can use this increase 
to become a master in a signature skill in which you're 
already an expert. If you are at least 15th level, you can 
use this increase to become legendary in a signature skill 
in which you're already a master.
ABILITY BOOSTS 5TH
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four 
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to 
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability 
score increases it by 1 if it's already 18 or above, or by 2 if 
it starts out below 18.ANCESTRY FEATS
 5TH
 In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain 
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter. 
The list of ancestry feats available to you can be found in 
your ancestry's entry in Chapter 2.
WEAPON
 EXPERTISE 5TH
Select a specific weapon group. Your proficiency rank 
for simple and martial weapons in that group increases 
to expert. 
ARMORED FORTITUDE 7TH
Your proficiency rank for heavy armor and shields 
increases to expert, and your proficiency rank for 
Fortitude saves increases to master. While wearing heavy 
armor, when you succeed at a Fortitude save, treat your 
result as a critical success instead. 
HOLY SMITE
 9TH
Your Retributive Strike surrounds evil targets in a 
righteous aura that punishes their transgressions. The target of a successful Retributive Strike takes persistent good damage equal to your Charisma modifier.
AURA OF JUSTICE
 11TH
When you use the Retributive Strike reaction, you can 
increase the penalty on your attack to –5. If you do so, 
whether or not your attack is a success, all allies within 
10 feet of you who can reach the target can also spend a 
reaction to make a normal Retributive Strike against the 
target. These additional attacks do not cause the target to 
become enfeebled. ARMOR
 MASTERY
 13TH
Your proficiency rank for heavy armor and shields 
increases to master, and your proficiency rank for light 
and medium armor increases to expert. Reduce the penalty to movement due to heavy armor from 10 feet 
to 5 feet. WEAPON
 MASTERY
 15TH
Your proficiency rank for simple and martial weapons in 
your chosen weapon group increases to master, and your 
proficiency rank for all other simple and martial weapons 
increases to expert. 
LEGENDARY ARMOR 17TH
Your proficiency rank for heavy armor and shields 
increases to legendary, and your proficiency rank for light 
and medium armor increases to master. Reduce the check 
penalty from armor and shields by 1.HERO'S DEFIANCE
 19TH
You gain the power to defy fate and continue fighting 
as long as you have divine energy. You gain the 
hero's 
defiance champion power, which you can cast by spending 
2 Spell Points. Increase your Spell Point pool by 2.KEY TERMSYou'll see the following key terms in many paladin abilities. 
Litany: Some paladin feats grant special champion powers 
called litanies, which have the litany trait. These powers usually 
require only a single action to cast, but most bolster their target 
against all of your powers that have the litany trait.
Metamagic: Feats with the metamagic trait allow you to tweak 
the properties of your spells. These feats are triggered when 
you begin casting a spell, and typically require you to spend an 
additional spellcasting action to alter the spell's effects. You can't 
use metamagic feats if adding an action to the spell would make 
the spell require more actions than you have remaining on your 
turn. Because most metamagic feats have the same trigger, you 
usually can't use more than one metamagic feat per spell.
Oath: 
Feats with the oath trait always add an additional 
tenet to the paladin's code, and a paladin can usually have 
only one such feat.
108 PALADIN FEATS
Every level at which you gain a paladin feat, you can select one of the following 
feats. You must satisfy any prerequisites before taking the feat.
1ST LEVEL
DEITY'S DOMAIN FEAT 1
 You embody an aspect of your deity. Choose one of your deity's domains (see 
the Deity table on page 72). You gain the ability to cast the domain's initial domain power as a 
champion power by spending 1 Spell Point. Increase your Spell Point pool by 1.
HOSPICE KNIGHT FEAT 1
 Your long hours in the hospice have taught you additional techniques for 
treating wounds. Your proficiency rank in Medicine increases to trained, and Medicine is 
a signature skill for you. Increase the healing from 
lay on hands from d4s to d6s.
WARDED TOUCH FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 champion power (lay on hands) You cast 
lay on hands in a simple motion without any complicated gestures. The Somatic 
Spellcasting action for lay on hands loses the manipulate trait.
2ND
 LEVEL
 DIVINE GRACE FEAT 2
 Trigger
 You are targeted by a spell that allows a saving throw.
You call upon your deity's grace to protect you from harm. You gain a +2 circumstance 
bonus to the saving throw.
DRAGONSLAYER OATH FEAT 2
 You've sworn an oath to slay evil dragons. Add the following tenet to your 
paladin's code after the other tenets: "You must slay evil dragons you come 
across as long as you have a reasonable chance of success."
Whenever an evil dragon within your reach hits an ally or friendly creature and you use 
that action as a trigger for your Retributive Strike reaction, your Retrributive Strike does 
not take the –2 penalty. You don't ever consider evil dragons to be legitimate authorities, 
even in nations ruled by evil dragons.
FIENDSBANE OATH FEAT 2
 You've sworn an oath to banish the corruption of fiends to the dark planes 
they call home. Add the following tenet to your paladin's code after the 
other tenets: "You must banish or slay fiends you come across as long as you have a 
reasonable chance of success; in the incredibly unlikely event you find a good fiend, you 
don't have to banish or kill it."
Whenever a fiend within your reach hits an ally or friendly creature and you use that 
action as a trigger for your Retributive Strike reaction, your Retrributive Strike does not 
take the –2 penalty. You don't ever consider fiends to be legitimate authorities, even in 
nations ruled by fiends. 
SHINING OATH FEAT 2
 You've sworn an oath to end the plague of undead. Add the following tenet 
to your paladin's code after the other tenets: "You must end the existence 
of undead you come across as long as you have a reasonable chance of success; in the 
unlikely event you find a good undead, you can try to work out a more peaceful way to 
help it recover from its undead state rather than destroying it in combat, such as helping 
it complete its unfinished business."
Whenever an undead within your reach hits an ally or friendly creature and you use 
PaladinPaladinPaladinPaladinOath
PaladinOath
PaladinOath
PaladinPALADIN FEATS
If you need to look up a paladin feat by 
name instead of by level, use this table.
Feat
 Level
Advanced Domain
8 Affiiction Mercy
12 Anchoring Aura
14 Angelic Form
18 Attack of Opportunity
6 Aura of Courage
4 Aura of Faith
12 Aura of Life
14 Aura of Righteousness
14 Aura of Vengeance
14 Auspicious Mount
16 Blade of Justice6 Celestial Mount20 Channel Life4 Deity's Domain
1 Divine Grace2 Divine Health4 Divine Will10 Dragonslayer Oath
2 Fiendsbane Oath
2 Greater Mercy
8 Heal Mount8 Holy Wall
12 Hospice Knight1 Imposing Destrier10 Instrument of Zeal16 Lasting Reprisal
6 Litany against Sloth10 Litany against Wrath
6 Litany of Righteousness14 Loyal Warhorse
6 Mercy
4 Paladin's Sacrifice 
12 Radiant Blade Master20 Radiant Blade Spirit10 Second Ally8 Sense Evil
8 Shield Champion20 Shield of Grace16 Shield of Reckoning
10 Shield Warden
6 Shining Oath
2 Ultimate Mercy
18 Vengeful Oath
2 Warded Touch
1 Warding Aura
14 109that action as a trigger for your Retributive Strike reaction, your 
Retrributive Strike does not take the –2 penalty. You don't ever 
consider undead to be legitimate authorities, even in nations 
ruled by undead. 
VENGEFUL OATH FEAT 2
 You've sworn an oath to hunt down the most 
heinous evildoers and bring them to celestial 
judgment, no matter where they hide. Add the following tenet to 
your paladin's code after the other tenets: "You must hunt down 
and exterminate evil creatures that have committed heinous 
atrocities as long as you have a reasonable chance of success and 
aren't engaged in a mission that would prevent your doing so."
You can use 
lay on hands 
to damage an evil creature as if 
it were undead; in this case, it deals good damage instead of 
positive damage and gains the good trait. This doesn't prevent 
you from healing an evil creature with 
lay on hands, and you 
can't use it to determine a creature's alignment if you aren't sure.
4TH LEVEL
AURA OF COURAGE FEAT 4
 Whenever you become frightened, reduce the 
condition value by 1 (to a minimum of 0). At the end of your turn 
when you would reduce your frightened condition value by 1, 
you also reduce the value by 1 for all allies within 10 feet.
CHANNEL LIFE FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 champion power (lay on hands) You can cast 
heal heightened to the same level as your champion 
powers by spending 1 Spell Point. Increase your Spell Point pool by 1.
DIVINE HEALTH FEAT 4
 Your faith makes you resistant to disease, allowing 
you to treat and ofier succor to the ill. You gain a +1 conditional 
bonus to saving throws against diseases. In addition, if you 
succeed at a saving throw against a disease, you treat the result 
as if it were a critical success.
 MERCY FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 champion power (lay on hands) Trigger
 You start to cast 
lay on hands to restore Hit 
Points to a creature.
Add a Verbal Casting action and increase the Spell Point cost by 
1. You can attempt to counteract a fear or paralysis efiect on the 
target creature of your 
lay on hands.6TH LEVEL
 ATTACK OF OPPORTUNITY FEAT 6
 Trigger
 A creature within your reach uses a 
manipulate action or a move action, makes a ranged attack, or 
leaves a square during a move action it's using.
Make a melee Strike against the triggering creature at a –2 
penalty. If the attack hits and the trigger was a manipulate 
action, you disrupt that action. This Strike doesn't count toward 
Oath
PaladinPaladinPaladinPaladinMetamagicPaladinPaladinyour multiple attack penalty, and your multiple attack penalty 
doesn't apply to this Strike.
 BLADE OF JUSTICE FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 righteous ally (blade)Your righteous weapon becomes a powerful tool 
against evildoers. Select one foe that you can see, calling that enemy 
to face judgment. Until the start of your next turn, your damage 
rolls with your righteous weapon against that foe gain a conditional 
bonus equal to the number of weapon damage dice. This damage 
applies only if the foe is evil. This bonus damage is good damage.
LASTING REPRISAL FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 retributive strike 
Your Retributive Strike causes the target to become enfeebled
 2. Critically hitting with a Retributive Strike causes the target to 
become enfeebled 3. This condition value is reduced by 1 each 
time the target attempts an attack action against you, and by 1 at 
the end of its turn (instead of ending automatically).
LITANY AGAINST WRATH FEAT 6
 You can cast the 
litany against wrath 
champion 
power by spending 1 Spell Point. Increase your Spell Point pool by 1.
LOYAL WARHORSE FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 retributive strike, righteous ally (steed)
You and your mount have grown closer, and your loyalty to 
each other is unbreakable. The mount you gained through the 
righteous ally class feature is now treated as a full-grown animal 
companion (see page 284). In addition, your mount never attacks 
you, even if it is magically compelled to do so. Finally, you can 
make a Retributive Strike against anyone who hits your mount 
with a Strike, even if the attack was not a critical hit.
SHIELD WARDEN FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 righteous ally (shield)You use your shield to protect your allies as well as yourself. 
When you are using a shield and you have it raised, you can 
trigger your Shield Block reaction when an attack is made 
against an ally adjacent to you. If you do, the shield prevents 
the ally from taking damage instead of you. Apart from these 
alterations, this follows the normal rules for a Shield Block.
8TH LEVEL
ADVANCED DOMAIN FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Deity's Domain 
You gain an advanced domain power from one of your domains. 
Increase your Spell Point pool by the number of Spell Points this 
new domain power costs to cast. 
GREATER MERCY FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Mercy 
The depths of your mercy enhance your ability to remove 
conditions. When you use Mercy, you can also attempt to 
counteract the blinded, deafened, sickened, or slowed conditions.
OpenPaladinPaladinPaladinPaladinPaladinPaladinPaladin110 HEAL MOUNT FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 righteous ally (steed)When you cast 
lay on hands on your mount, you can choose 
to restore Hit Points equal to 8 × the spell level instead of the 
usual amount. SECOND ALLY FEAT 8
 You draw holy spirits to you like moths to a flame. 
Choose a second type of righteous ally and gain its benefits. SENSE EVIL FEAT 8
 When in the presence of an aura of evil that 
is powerful or stronger (see page 214), you detect the aura, 
though you might not do so instantly and you can't pinpoint the 
location. An evil creature using a disguise or otherwise trying 
to hide its presence must attempt a Deception check against 
your Perception DC or you eventually feel its aura as well. If the 
creature's Deception check is a success, it is bolstered against 
your Sense Evil.
10TH LEVEL
DIVINE WILL FEAT 10

Prerequisites
 expert in Will saving throws
Your faith grants you mastery of your own will. Your proficiency 
rank in Will saves increases to master. When you succeed at a 
Will save, treat your result as a critical success.
IMPOSING DESTRIER FEAT 10

Prerequisites
 righteous ally (steed), Loyal Warhorse
The mount you gained through the righteous ally class feature is 
now a nimble or savage animal companion (see page 284). During 
an encounter, even if you don't use the Command an Animal 
action, your mount can still spend an action that round on your 
turn to Stride or Strike. LITANY AGAINST SLOTH FEAT 10

You can cast the 
litany against sloth champion power 
by spending 1 Spell Point. Increase your Spell Point pool by 1.
RADIANT BLADE SPIRIT FEAT 10

Prerequisites
 righteous ally (blade)Your righteous ally's radiance enhances your chosen weapon. 
When you choose the weapon for your blade righteous ally 
during your daily preparations, add the following properties 
to the list of those you can choose from: 
axiomatic, flaming, and holy. SHIELD OF RECKONING FEAT 10

Prerequisites
 retributive strike, righteous ally 
(shield), Shield Warden
When you use the Shield Block reaction to prevent damage 
to an ally, you can also use a Retributive Strike reaction 
against the foe that attacked your ally, assuming the foe's 
attack that triggered Shield Block also qualifies as a trigger 
for Retributive Strike.
PaladinPaladinPaladinPaladinPaladinPaladinPaladinPaladin12TH LEVEL
AFFLICTION MERCY FEAT 12

Prerequisites
 Mercy 
When you use Mercy, you can also attempt to counteract a curse, 
disease, or poison. AURA OF FAITH FEAT 12

You radiate an aura of pure belief that imbues your 
attacks and those of nearby allies with holy power. Your Strikes 
deal 1 additional good damage against evil creatures. Good-
aligned allies within 10 feet also gain this benefit on the first 
Strike that hits a given creature each round.
HOLY WALL FEAT 12

Requirements
 You are wielding a shield.
You use your shield to harry your enemies, preventing them from 
stepping away from or around you. All spaces adjacent to you 
count as diflcult terrain for your enemies.
PALADIN'S SACRIFICE FEAT 12

You can cast the 
paladin's sacrifice 
champion power 
by spending 1 Spell Point. Increase your Spell Point pool by 1.
14TH LEVEL
ANCHORING AURA FEAT 14

Requirements
 Fiendsbane Oath
Your aura hampers fiends' teleportation. Your aura attempts to 
dispel all teleportation spells cast by fiends within 10 feet of you. 
This dispel attempt uses the spell level of your champion powers.
AURA OF LIFE FEAT 14

Requirements
 Shining Oath
Your aura protects against necromantic effects. You and all allies 
within 10 feet gain resistance 5 to negative energy and a +1 
conditional bonus to saves against necromancy.
AURA OF RIGHTEOUSNESS FEAT 14

Your righteous aura dampens evil's might. You and 
all allies within 10 feet gain evil resistance 5.
AURA OF VENGEANCE FEAT 14

Requirements
 aura of justice, Vengeful Oath
When you use aura of justice, you don't take a penalty on your 
attack roll.
LITANY OF RIGHTEOUSNESS FEAT 14

You call upon righteousness to expose an evil foe's 
weakness. You can cast the 
litany of righteousness champion power 
by spending 1 Spell Point. Increase your Spell Point pool by 1.
WARDING AURA FEAT 14

Requirements
 Dragonslayer Oath
Your aura protects against destructive energies and dragon breath. 
You and all allies within 10 feet gain resistance 2 to acid, cold, 
PaladinPaladinPaladinPaladinPaladinPaladinPaladinPaladinPaladinPaladin111electricity, fire, and poison. If the source of one of these types of 
damage is a dragon's breath, increase the resistance to 5.
16TH LEVEL
AUSPICIOUS MOUNT FEAT 16

 Prerequisites
 righteous ally (steed), Imposing 
DestrierThe mount you gained through the righteous ally class feature 
is now a specialized animal companion (see page 284). You 
can select one of the usual specializations or the auspice 
specialization. Auspices gain the following benefits: Your 
companion is marked by your deity's religious symbol as a sacred 
creature. Its proficiency rank in Religion increases to expert, it 
can speak Celestial, and it increases its Intelligence modifier by 2 
and Wisdom modifier by 1. 
INSTRUMENT OF ZEAL FEAT 16

Prerequisites
 righteous ally (blade)Your righteous blade becomes an instrument of divine zeal. 
Whenever you critically hit a foe with Blade of Justice or a 
Retributive Strike, your attack adds an extra damage die, and 
the target is slowed 1 on its next turn. 
SHIELD OF GRACE FEAT 16

Prerequisites
 righteous ally (shield), Shield Warden 
Whenever you use the Shield Block reaction to prevent damage 
to an ally, you can evenly split the remaining damage after the 
Shield Block between yourself and the ally.
18TH LEVEL
ANGELIC FORM FEAT 18

You take on an angelic countenance, with a halo 
and feathery wings that grant you a fly Speed equal to your 
Speed. You gain darkvision and low-light vision if you don't 
already have them, and you gain the angel and celestial traits.
ULTIMATE MERCY FEAT 18

Prerequisites
 Mercy 
Your mercy transcends the boundary of life and death. 
When you use Mercy, you can use 
lay on hands on a creature that died since your last turn to return it to life. 
The target loses the dead condition and instead gains dying 3 (reducing its current dying condition value if 
necessary), and it gains a +2 conditional bonus to its next recovery saving throw. You can't use Ultimate Mercy if the 
triggering efiect was 
disintegrate
 or a death efiect.
20TH LEVEL
CELESTIAL MOUNT FEAT 20

Prerequisites
 righteous ally (steed)Your steed gains incredible celestial powers granted by your deity. 
It gains darkvision and resistance 10 to acid and cold. Additionally, 
it grows feathery wings, granting it a fly Speed equal to its Speed. 
PaladinPaladinPaladinPaladinPaladinPaladinRADIANT BLADE MASTER FEAT  
20
Prerequisites
 righteous ally (blade), Radiant Blade SpiritYour righteous ally is a paragon of the chosen weapon. When 
you choose the weapon for your blade righteous ally during daily 
preparations, add the following properties to the list of those you 
can choose from: 
dancing, greater disrupting, and keen. SHIELD CHAMPION FEAT 20

Prerequisites
 righteous ally (shield)When wielding your chosen shield, it always counts as raised, 
even without using the Raise a Shield action. If your shield 
would be destroyed, it vanishes to the celestial realms instead, 
where your righteous ally repairs it. During your next daily 
preparations, the shield returns to you fully repaired.
PaladinPaladin112 For some rangers, civilization is so corrupt it wears down the soul, yet so 
beneficial it needs protecting from wild things that stalk the hinterlands. 
For others, nature needs to be protected from the greedy hands of 
civilized people wishing to tame its beauty and plunder its treasures. 
You could champion either goal, or straddle the line of both. You might 
be a scout, tracker, or hunter of fugitives or beasts, haunting the edge 
of civilization or exploring the wilds. Living off the land, you are skilled 
at spotting and taking down both opportune prey and hated enemies. 
RANGER113 KEY ABILITYDexterity
HIT POINTS10 plus your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
PERCEPTIONExpertSAVING THROWSExpert in Fortitude 
Expert in Reflex 
Expert in WillSKILLS
Trained in a number of skills equal to 
 6 plus your Intelligence modifier.
WEAPONS
Trained in all simple and martial weapons
ARMOR
Trained in light armor and medium armor
SIGNATURE SKILLS
Acrobatics
Athletics
CraftingNature
StealthSurvival
PLAYING A RANGER
Players of ranger characters might approach gameplay in the following ways:
Ł During combat, you target and brutalize your chosen foe with either a bow or 
melee weapons, while supporting your allies with your skills. 

Ł During social encounters, you keep an eye out for trouble, constantly alert for 
danger even when it's not overt. 

Ł In exploration mode, you guide your allies through the wilderness.

Ł In downtime mode, you might craft weapons and snares to improve your chances.
ROLEPLAYING A RANGER
Rangers are often seen as loners, standing apart from society. 
IF YOU'RE A RANGER, YOU LIKELY...

Ł Enjoy the thrill of the hunt.

Ł Respect the raw power of nature and understand how to make the best of its bounty.

Ł Scout out ahead of the party, reconnoitering dangers before combat begins. 
OTHERS PROBABLY...

Ł Expect you to be quiet and maybe taciturn.

Ł Think there is something dangerous and wild about you.

Ł Call upon you to protect them from the wilds or the encroachment of civilization.
CLASS FEATURES
You gain these abilities as a ranger. Abilities gained at higher levels list the 
requisite levels next to the features' names. 
HUNT TARGETYou gain the Hunt Target action, granting you an advantage against a foe. 
 HUNT TARGET
Requirements
 You can see or hear the target.
You designate a single creature within 100 feet as your target and focus your attacks 
against that creature. While hunting that creature, you gain benefits for focusing your 
attacks. As long as all your attacks in a round are against target you're hunting, the 
multiple attack penalty you take on the second attack is –4 (–3 with an agile weapon) 
instead of –5, and –8 (–6 with an agile weapon) instead of –10 on the third and any 
further attacks in the round. You also ignore the penalty for making ranged attacks 
against the target you're hunting within your second range increment. You also gain 
a +2 circumstance bonus to Perception checks when you Seek your target and a +2 
circumstance bonus to Survival checks when you Track your target. 
You can have only one creature designated as the target of your hunt at a time. If you 
use Hunt Target against a creature when you already have a creature designated, the 
prior creature loses the designation and the new target gains the designation. In any 
case, this designation lasts until your next daily preparation (see page 332).
RANGER FEATSAt 1st level and every even-numbered level, you gain a ranger class feat. SKILL FEATS 2ND
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill feat. Skill feats are 
found in Chapter 5 and have the skill trait. You must be trained or better in the 
corresponding skill to select a skill feat. GENERAL FEATS 3RD
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a general feat. General feats 
are listed in Chapter 5.Ranger114 TABLE 3–17: RANGER ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level
Class Features
1 Ancestry feat, background, hunt target, initial 
proficiencies, ranger feat
2 Ranger feat, skill feat
3 General feat, skill increase, weapon expertise
4 Ranger feat, skill feat
5 Ability boosts, ancestry feat, skill increase, trackless 
step6 Ranger feat, skill feat
7 Evasion, general feat, skill increase 
8 Ranger feat, skill feat
9 Ancestry feat, nature's edge, skill increase
10 Ability boosts, ranger feat, skill feat
11 General feat, skill increase, wild stride
12 Ranger feat, skill feat
13 Ancestry feat, skill increase, weapon mastery
14 Ranger feat, skill feat
15 Ability boosts, general feat, improved evasion, skill 
increase
16 Ranger feat, skill feat
17 Ancestry feat, masterful hunter, skill increase
18 Ranger feat, skill feat
19 General feat, skill increase, swift target
20 Ability boosts, ranger feat, skill FEATSKILL
 INCREASES 3RD
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a 
skill increase. You can use this increase to either become 
trained in one skill you're untrained in, or become an 
expert in one skill in which you're already trained. If you are at least 7th level, you can use this increase 
to become a master in a signature skill in which you're 
already an expert. If you are at least 15th level, you can 
use this increase to become legendary in a signature skill 
in which you're already a master.
WEAPON
 EXPERTISE 3RD
Choose a single weapon group. Your proficiency rank 
increases to expert for the simple and martial weapons of 
that group. You gain access to the critical specialization 
effects of all simple and martial weapons in that group. ABILITY BOOSTS 5TH
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four 
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to 
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability 
score increases it by 1 if it's already 18 or above, or by 2 if 
it starts out below 18.TRACKLE
SS STE
P 5TH
When you move through natural terrains, you are difficult 
to track. You always gain the benefits of the Cover Tracks 
action in such terrains, without moving at half your Speed. ANCESTRY FEATS 5TH
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain 
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter. 
The list of ancestry feats available to you can be found in 
your ancestry's entry in Chapter 2.
EVA
SION
 7TH
Your senses and reflexes are honed to a razor's edge, allowing 
you to leap out harm's way. You gain master proficiency in 
Reflex saves and Perception. When you succeed at a Reflex 
save, treat the outcome as a critical success instead. 
NATURE'S EDGE
 9TH
You treat enemies in areas of natural difficult terrain, or in 
difficult terrain resulting from a snare, as flat-footed. WILD
 S
TRIDE
 11TH
You can ignore the effects of nonmagical difficult terrain 
and reduce the effects of nonmagical greater difficult 
terrain, treating it as if it were difficult terrain instead. 
Difficult terrain or greater difficult terrain effects of 
hazardous terrain affect you normally.
WEAPON MASTERY 13TH
Your proficiency rank for simple and martial weapons in 
your chosen weapon group increases to master, and your 
proficiency rank for all other simple and martial weapons 
increases to expert. You gain access to the critical 
specialization effects of all simple and martial weapons. IMPROVED
 EVA
SION
 15TH
You become legendary at Reflex saves and Perception. 
When you critically fail a Reflex save, treat the outcome 
as a failure instead. When you fail a Reflex save against 
an effect that deals damage, you take only half damage. MASTER
FUL HUNTER 17TH
You can blend your weapon mastery with skillful targeting 
to make a series of accurate attacks. If you are a master 
with your weapon, as long as all your weapon attacks in 
a round are against the target you're hunting, the multiple 
attack penalty you take on the second attack is –3 (–2 with 
an agile weapon) instead of –5, and –6 (–4 with an agile 
weapon) instead of –10 on the third and any further attacks. If you are a master with your weapon, you can ignore the 
penalty against the target of your hunt for attacking within 
its second and third range increments. If you're a master in Perception, you gain a +4 circumstance 
bonus to Perception checks when you Seek your target, and if 
you're a master in Survival, you gain a +4 circumstance bonus 
to Survival checks when you Track your target.
SWI
FT TARGET
 19TH
You can use Hunt Target as a free action triggered before 
you make your first Strike each round. 115 RANGER FEATS
At every level that you gain a ranger feat, you can select one of the following. You 
must satisfy any prerequisites before taking the feat. 
1ST LEVEL
ANIMAL COMPANION FEAT 1
 You gain the service of a young animal companion that travels with you and 
obeys simple commands to the best of its abilities. See Animal Companions on page 284.
CROSSBOW ACE FEAT 1
 When you use Hunt Target or when you use Interact to reload your crossbow, 
if your next Strike with that crossbow before the end of your next turn is against your hunted 
target, add half your Wisdom modifier to your damage roll; if you are firing a simple crossbow 
on a qualifying attack, also increase the damage dice on that attack by one size (see page 91).
 DOUBLE SLICE FEAT 1
 Requirements 
You are wielding two melee weapons, each in a different hand.
Make one Strike with each of the required weapons, both at your current multiple attack 
penalty. The second Strike takes a –2 circumstance penalty if the weapon doesn't have the 
agile trait. If both attacks hit, combine the damage and add any applicable enhancements 
from both weapons. For purposes of resistances and weaknesses, this is considered to be 
a single Strike. This counts as two attacks when calculating your multiple attack penalty.
MONSTER HUNTER FEAT 1
 When you critically succeed to identify a target you're hunting with Recall 
Knowledge, you (and your allies, if you tell them) gain a +1 circumstance bonus to your 
next attack roll against it, but not other creatures of that species. The creature is bolstered.
2ND
 LEVEL
 FAVORED AIM FEAT 2
 Attempt a ranged weapon Strike against your hunted target. Ignore concealed 
and screened, and reduce the target's bonus to AC from cover by 2. If the 
target isn't benefiting from any of those, you gain a +2 circumstance bonus to the attack roll.
MONSTER WARDEN FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 Monster HunterWhen you use Monster Hunter, you and your allies also gain a +1 circumstance bonus to 
your next saving throw against that particular creature. 
 QUICK DRAW FEAT 2
 You Interact to draw a weapon, then Strike with the weapon you just drew.
 STALKER'S SHOT FEAT 2
 Trigger 
The target you're hunting fails or critically fails to Seek you.
Requirements 
You are unseen to the target you're hunting. 
Make a ranged weapon Strike against that target with a –2 circumstance penalty. You then 
become seen to all who witnessed the Strike (or sensed, if you are invisible or the like).  
4TH LEVEL
COMPANION'S BOND FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Animal CompanionWhen you designate a Hunt Target, your animal companion gains the action's base benefits, 
but not the benefits of any abilities you have that improve Hunt Target.
RangerRangerRangerRangerConcentrate
RangerRangerRangerRangerRangerRANGER FEATS
If you need to look up a ranger feat by 
name instead of by level, use this table.
Feat
Level
Animal Companion1 Camouflage10 Companion's Bond
4 Crossbow Ace
1 Distracting Shot12 Double Slice1 Double Target
12 Favored Aim
2 Full-Grown Companion
6 Greater Distracting Shot
16 Hazard Finder
8 Hunting Companion8 Impossible Volley
18 Improvised Snare
18 Incredible Companion
12 Master Monster Hunter10 Monster Hunter1 Monster Warden
2 Powerful Snares 
16 Quick Draw
2 Quick Snares
8 Running Reload
4 Scout's Warning
4 Sense the Unseen14 Shadow Hunter
20 Shared Target
14 Side by Side
10 Skirmish Strike6 Snare Savant
4 Specialized Companion
16STalker's Shot
2STealthy Companion14 Swift Tracker
6 Triple Threat
20 Twin Parry
4 Twin Riposte
10 Warden's Boon
8 Warden's Guidance
14 Wild Empathy
6116 RUNNING RELOAD FEAT 4
 You Stride, Step, or Sneak, then Interact to reload.
 SCOUT'S WARNING FEAT 4
 Trigger
 You are about to roll Perception for initiative.
You audibly or visually warn your allies of danger, granting them 
a +1 circumstance bonus to their initiative rolls.
SNARE SAVANT FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 expert in Crafting, Snare Crafting feat
You gain the formulas for three common or uncommon snares (see 
page 357). Each time your proficiency rank in Crafting improves, 
you gain three more common or uncommon snare formulas. 
 TWIN PARRY FEAT 4
 Requirements 
You are wielding two melee weapons, 
one in each hand. You use your two weapons to parry attacks. If neither weapon 
is agile or if either weapon has the parry trait, you gain a +2 
circumstance bonus to AC until the start of your next turn. 
Otherwise, you gain a +1 circumstance bonus to AC until the start 
of your next turn instead. You lose the circumstance bonus if you 
no longer meet the requirement.
6TH LEVEL
FULLflGROWN COMPANION FEAT 6
 Prerequisites 
Animal CompanionYour animal companion grows up, becoming a full-grown animal 
companion, and gaining additional capabilities (see page 284). SKIRMISH STRIKE FEAT 6
 Either Step and then Strike, or Strike and then Step. 
You take a –1 penalty to the Strike's attack roll. 
SWIFT TRACKER FEAT 6
 Prerequisites 
expert in Survival, Experienced Tracker 
You don't take the penalty to Track at your full Speed. If you're 
a master in Survival, you don't need to roll a new Survival check 
every hour. If you're legendary in Survival, you can take another 
exploration strategy while Tracking.
WILD EMPATHY FEAT 6
 You have a connection to the creatures of the 
natural world that allows you to communicate with them on a 
rudimentary level. You can use Diplomacy to Make an Impression 
on animals and to make very simple requests of them. 
8TH LEVEL
HAZARD FINDER FEAT 8
 You have an intuitive hazard sense. You gain a 
+1 circumstance bonus to Perception checks to find traps and 
hazards, to AC against their attacks, and to saves against their 
effects. Thievery becomes a signature skill for you. 
RangerRangerRangerRangerRangerAttack
Move
RangerRangerRangerRangerHUNTING COMPANION FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Full-Grown Companion
Your animal companion gains accelerated 10 when taking move 
actions to approach a target that you're hunting. 
QUICK SNARES FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 expert Crafting, Snare Savant
You craft snares that normally take 1 minute with 3 Interact actions.
  WARDEN'S BOON FEAT 8
 You grant your base Hunt Target benefits to an ally 
until the end of the ally's next turn. The ally doesn't gain the 
benefits of any abilities you have that improved Hunt Target.
10TH LEVEL
CAMOUFLAGE FEAT 10

Prerequisites 
master in StealthIn natural terrain, you can Sneak even if you're observed.
MASTER MONSTER HUNTER FEAT 10

Prerequisites 
master in Nature,
 Monster HunterYou can use Nature to Recall Knowledge to identify any creature. 
You gain the benefits of Monster Hunter (and Monster Warden, if 
you have it) on a success as well as a critical success.
SIDE BY SIDE FEAT 10

Prerequisites
 Animal CompanionWhenever you and your animal companion are both adjacent to 
the same foe, you both count as if you were flanking that foe, 
regardless of your actual position.
 TWIN RIPOSTE FEAT 10

Requirements
 You are benefiting from the Twin 
Parry action. Trigger
 An opponent within your reach critically fails at a Strike 
against you.
Your clever parry with one weapon leaves your opponent open 
to an attack with the other weapon. Make a melee Strike or use 
a Disarm action against the triggering opponent.12TH LEVEL
DISTRACTING SHOT FEAT 12

If you critically hit the target you're hunting with 
a ranged weapon or hit it at least twice on the same turn with a 
ranged weapon, it's flat-footed until the start of your next turn.
DOUBLE TARGET FEAT 12

When using Hunt Target, you can pick two targets.
INCREDIBLE COMPANION FEAT 12

Prerequisites
 Full-Grown Companion 
Your animal companion becomes a nimble or savage animal 
companion (your choice), gaining additional capabilities 
determined by the type of companion (see page 284).
RangerRangerRangerRangerRangerRangerRangerRangerRangerRanger11714TH LEVEL
 SENSE THE UNSEEN FEAT 14

Trigger
 You use the Seek action.
You automatically sense any unseen creatures in the area.
SHARED TARGET FEAT 14

Prerequisites
 Double Target, Warden's Boon
When you use Hunt Target, you can select only one target and 
grant your base Hunt Target benefits to an ally, without the 
benefits of any abilities that improve Hunt Target.
STEALTHY COMPANION FEAT 14

Prerequisites
 CamouflageYour animal companion gains the benefit of Camouflage. If your 
companion is a specialized ambusher, it becomes a master in 
Stealth (or legendary if it was already a master).
WARDEN'S GUIDANCE FEAT 14

As long as you can see the target of your hunt, all 
allies automatically succeed when Seeking it.
16TH LEVEL
GREATER DISTRACTING SHOT FEAT 16

If you hit a target you're hunting with a ranged 
weapon, it's flat-footed until the start of your next turn. If 
instead you critically hit your target or hit it twice on the same 
turn with a ranged weapon, it's flat-footed until the end of your 
next turn.
POWERFUL SNARES FEAT 16

Prerequisites
 master in Crafting, Snare 
Crafting, Snare Savant
When you set a snare, any saving throw DC becomes your 
class DC if that's better than its normal DC. 
SPECIALIZED COMPANION FEAT 16

Prerequisites
 Animal Companion, Full-Grown 
Companion, Incredible Companion 
Your animal companion is now cunning enough to become 
specialized. Select one specialization from those found in the 
Animal Companion section and apply it to your companion.
18TH LEVEL
 IMPOSSIBLE VOLLEY FEAT 18

Requirements
 You are wielding a ranged weapon 
with the volley trait and reload 0.
You fire a volley at all foes in an area. Make a Strike with a 
–5 penalty against all enemies within a 10-foot-radius burst 
centered at or beyond your weapon's volley range. 
IMPROVISED SNARE FEAT 18

Prerequisites
 Snare Crafting, Snare Savant
You can craft a snare without needing to have any required 
RangerRangerRangerRangerRangerRangerRangerRangerRangermaterials, but when you do, the DC of any saves decreases by 2 
and you can't use Powerful Snares to increase the DC. 
20TH LEVEL
SHADOW HUNTER FEAT 20

Prerequisites
 CamouflageCreatures other than the target you're hunting always treat you 
as concealed in natural terrain.
TRIPLE THREAT FEAT 20

Prerequisites
 Double Target, Shared Target, 
Warden's Boon
When you use Hunt Target, you can designate three targets, 
designate two targets and grant the efiect to one ally, or designate 
one target and grant the efiect to two allies. Whichever you 
choose, you gain the full benefits. If you have additional abilities 
that improve Hunt Target, your allies don't gain those
 benefits. 
RangerRanger118 You are skilled and opportunistic, and you use your sharp wits to take 
advantage of your opponents' missteps in order to strike where it hurts 
most. While the stereotypical rogue is a thief or scoundrel, plenty of 
rogues make respectable and honorable livings as bounty hunters, 
detectives, or scouts, and even sometimes as aristocrats, diplomats, or 
politicians. One thing you all share in common is the breadth and 
depth of your training in skills, easily outpacing your more martially or 
magically inclined comrades. 
ROGUE
119 KEY ABILITYDexterity
HIT POINTS8 plus your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
PERCEPTIONExpertSAVING THROWS
Trained in Fortitude
Expert in Reflex
Expert in WillSKILLS
Trained in a number of skills equal to 
10 plus your Intelligence modifier.
WEAPONS
Trained in all simple weapons, plus the 
hand crossbow, rapier, sap, shortbow, and 
shortsword
ARMOR
Trained in light armor
SIGNATURE SKILLS
Acrobatics
Athletics
CraftingDeceptionDiplomacyIntimidation
Performance
SocietyStealthThievery
PLAYING A ROGUE
Players of rogue characters might approach gameplay in the following ways:
Ł During combat, you move about stealthily so you can catch foes unawares. You're 
a precision instrument, better used against a tough boss or distant spellcaster than 
against rank-and-file soldiers. 

Ł During social encounters, your skills give you multiple tools to influence your 
opposition. Pulling a con and ferreting information are second nature.

Ł  In exploration mode, you sneak to get the drop on foes or look for danger or traps. 
You're a great asset since you can disable traps, solve puzzles, and anticipate dangers.

Ł In downtime mode, you might pick pockets or trade in illegal goods. You can also 
become part of a thieves' guild, or even found one of your own.
ROLEPLAYING A ROGUE
Rogues are known for being swift, stealthy, and skilled.
IF YOU'RE A ROGUE, YOU LIKELY...

Ł Hone your skills through intense practice, both on your own and out in the world.

Ł Know where to attain illicit goods.

Ł Skirt or break the law because you think it's meaningless or have your own code.
OTHERS PROBABLY...

Ł Think you're motivated only by greed.

Ł Find you charming or fascinating, even if they think they know better than to trust you.

Ł Come to you when they need someone willing to take risks and break the law.
CLASS FEATURES
You gain these abilities. Abilities gained at higher levels list the requisite levels. 
FINE
SS
E S
TRIKER
When you attack with an agile or finesse one-handed melee weapon, you can 
add your Dexterity modifier to damage instead of your Strength modifier.
SNEAK ATTACKYou deal additional damage to flat-footed creatures (see page 322). If you Strike 
a flat-footed creature with an agile or finesse melee weapon, an agile or finesse 
unarmed attack, or a ranged attack, you deal 1d6 extra precision damage. For a 
ranged attack with a thrown weapon, that weapon must also be agile or finesse. As your rogue levels increase, so does the number of damage dice of your 
sneak attack. Increase the number of dice by one at 5th, 11th, and 17th levels. SUR
PRI
SE ATTACK
On the first round of combat, creatures that haven't acted are flat-footed to you.
ROGUE FEATSAt 1st level and every even-numbered level, you gain a rogue class feat. 
SKILL FEATSYou gain skill feats more often than others. At 1st level and every level thereafter, 
you gain a skill feat. Skill feats can be found in Chapter 5 and have the skill trait. 
SKILL
 INCREASES 2ND
You gain extra skill increases. At 2nd level and every level thereafter, you gain a 
skill increase. You can use this increase to either become trained in one skill you're 
untrained in, or become an expert in one skill in which you're already trained. If you are at least 7th level, you can use this increase to become a master in a 
signature skill in which you're already an expert. If you are at least 15th level, you 
120 TABLE 3–18: ROGUE ADVANCEMENT
Your 
 Level
 Class Features
1 Ancestry feat, background, finesse striker, initial 
proficiencies, rogue feat, skill feat, sneak attack 1d6, 
surprise attack
2 Rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
3 Deny advantage, general feat, skill feat, skill increase
4 Rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
5 Ability boosts, ancestry feat, skill feat, skill increase, 
sneak attack 2d6
6 Rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
7 Evasion, general feat, skill feat, skill increase
8 Rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
9 Ancestry feat, debilitating strike, skill feat, skill increase
10 Ability boosts, rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
11 General feat, skill feat, skill increase, sneak attack 3d6
12 Rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
13 Ancestry feat, improved evasion, skill feat, skill increase, 
weapon tricks
14 Rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
15 Ability boosts, double debilitation, general feat, skill feat, 
skill increase
16 Rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
17 Ancestry feat, skill feat, skill increase, slippery mind, 
sneak attack 4d6
18 Rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
19 General feat, master strike, skill feat, skill increase
20 Ability boosts, rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
KEY TERMSYou'll see the following key terms in many rogue abilities. 
Enhancements: Enhancements are additional effects applied to 
a Strike that deals damage. Some enhancements require a critical 
success against your opponent in order to apply them. 
Debilitations: 
Debilitations are a type of enhancement. A 
creature can't be afiected by more than one at a time, even from 
different creatures. When the creature is afiected by a new 
debilitation, any previous one it was afiected by ends.
can use this increase to become legendary in a signature skill 
in which you're already a master.
DENY ADVANTAGE 3RD
You aren't flat-footed to sensed, unseen, or flanking creatures 
of your level or lower; they can still provide allies a flank. GENERAL FEATS 3RD
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a 
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.ABILITY BOOSTS 5TH
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four 
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to 
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability 
score increases it by 1 if it's already 18 or above, or by 2 if 
it starts out below 18.ANCESTRY FEATS 5TH
In addition to your initial ancestry feat you started with, 
you gain an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels 
thereafter. The list of ancestry feats available to you can be 
found in your ancestry's entry in Chapter 2.
EVA
SION
 7TH
Your proficiency rank for Reflex saves and Perception 
increases to master. When you succeed at a Reflex save, 
treat the outcome as a critical success. DEBILITATING
 S
TRIKE
 9TH
You gain the Debilitating Strike free action.
 DEBILITATING STRIKE
Trigger
 Your Strike hits a flat-footed creature
You apply one of the following debilitations, which lasts until the 
end of your next turn.
Debilitation
 The target becomes entangled. Debilitation
 The target becomes enfeebled 1.IMPROVED
 EVA
SION
 13TH
Your proficiency rank for Reflex saves and Perception 
increases to legendary. When you critically fail a Reflex 
save, treat the outcome as a failure. When you fail a Reflex 
save against a damaging effect, you take half damage. WEAPON
 TRICK
S 13TH
You become an expert in all simple weapons plus the hand 
crossbow, rapier, sap, shortbow, and shortsword.
DOUBLE DEBILITATION 15TH
When you use Debilitating Strike, you can apply two 
debilitations simultaneously; removing one removes both. SLI
PP
ERY MIND 17TH
You become a master at Will saves. When you succeed at 
a Will save, treat the outcome as a critical success instead.
MASTER STRIKE
 19TH
You gain the Master Strike free action.
 MASTER STRIKE
Trigger
 Your Strike hits a flat-footed creature.
You apply the following enhancement.
Enhancement The target must attempt a Fortitude save at 
your class DC, with the following effects. It is bolstered.
Success The target is enfeebled 2 until the end of your next turn. 
Critical Success No efiect. Failure
 The target is paralyzed for 4 rounds.
Critical Failure
 The target is paralyzed for 4 rounds, knocked 
unconscious for 2 hours, or killed (your choice).
Rogue
Rogue
121 ROGUE FEATS
At every level that you gain a rogue feat, you can select one of the following 
feats. You must satisfy any prerequisites before selecting the feat.
1ST LEVEL
BLUDGEONER FEAT 1
 You make brutal bludgeoning attacks that daze your foes. You can deal 
sneak attack damage with one-handed weapons of the club and mace groups even if 
they don't have the agile or finesse trait. When you Strike with that weapon and critically 
succeed at the attack roll, you gain the following enhancement.
Enhancement The target is slowed 1 until the end of your next turn.
 NIMBLE DODGE FEAT 1
 Requirements
 You are not encumbered.
Trigger
 You are targeted with a melee or ranged attack by an attacker that you see.
You nimbly dodge out of the way, gaining a +2 circumstance bonus to your Armor Class 
against the triggering attack.
TRAP FINDER FEAT 1
 You have an intuitive sense that alerts you to the dangers and presence of 
traps. You gain a +1 circumstance bonus to Perception checks to find traps, to AC against 
attacks made by traps, and to saves against traps. Even if you aren't searching, you still 
get a check to find traps if you are trained or better in Stealth. You can disable traps as 
though you had a proficiency rank of master in Thievery; if your proficiency modifier in 
Thievery is actually master, this increases to legendary instead.
 YOU'RE NEXT FEAT 1
 Trigger
 You kill an enemy.
After downing a foe, you menacingly remind another foe that you're coming 
after them next. Attempt an Intimidation check with a +2 circumstance 
bonus to Demoralize a single creature that you can see and that can see 
you. If you are 10th level or higher, you can use this as a free action with the same trigger.
2ND
 LEVEL
FOOTPAD'S FOCUS FEAT 2
 When you critically succeed at an attack roll against a flat-footed creature 
with an agile or light simple weapon or a hand crossbow, rapier, sap, shortbow, or 
shortsword, you apply the critical specialization efiect for the weapon you're wielding.
MOBILITY FEAT 2
 When you take a Stride action to move half your Speed or less, that 
movement does not trigger reactions. You can use Mobility when 
Climbing, Flying, or Swimming instead of Striding if you have the corresponding 
movement type.
 QUICK DRAW FEAT 2
 You draw a weapon with the Interact action, then Strike with the weapon 
you just drew.
 SNIPER'S AIM FEAT 2
 Close observation lets you pinpoint an enemy's weakness at a distance 
and pierce concealment. Until the end of your turn, you treat creatures within 30 feet 
of you as though they weren't concealed when you make Strikes with ranged weapons 
against them. Rogue
Rogue
Rogue
EmotionFear
MentalRogue
Rogue
Move
Rogue
Rogue
Rogue
ROGUE FEATS
If you need to look up a rogue feat by 
name instead of by level, use this table.
Feat
Level
Battle Assessment
4 Blank Slate
16 Blind-Fight6 Bludgeoner1 Cloud Step16 Cognitive Loophole
16 Critical Debilitation
12 Defensive Roll
14 Delay Trap
8 Dispelling Slice16 Dread Striker
4 Fantastic Leap
12 Felling Shot
12 Footpad's Focus
2 Gang Up6 Hidden Paragon20 Implausible Infiltration
18 Improved Poison Weapon
8 Instant Opening14 Light Step6 Mobility2 Nimble Dodge1 Nimble Roll
8 Opportune Backstab8 Perfect Distraction
16 Poison Weapon
4 Quick Draw
2 Reactive Distraction
20 Reactive Interference
18 Reactive Pursuit
4 Running Reload
4 Sabotage4 Scout's Warning
4 Sense the Unseen14 Sidestep8 Skirmish Strike6 Sly Striker8 Sneak Savant
10 Sniper's Aim
2 Spring from the Shadows
14 Tactical Debilitations
10 Trap Finder
1 Trickster's Ace
18 Twist the Knife
6 Unbalancing Blow
4 Vicious Debilitations
10 You're Next
11224TH LEVEL
 BATTLE ASSESSMENT FEAT 4
 With careful observation, you identify an enemy's 
strengths and weaknesses. The GM rolls your 
Perception check against the Stealth or Deception DC (whichever 
is higher) of an enemy who is not concealed from you or unseen 
by you. The GM might apply a penalty for the distance between 
you and the enemy. You can't use battle assessment more than 
once on the same enemy.
Success The GM chooses one of the following pieces of 
information to tell you about that enemy: which of the 
enemy's weaknesses imposes the worst penalty, which 
of the enemy's saving throws has the lowest bonus (this 
might be several if multiple saves are tied for lowest), 
one immunity the enemy has, or which of the enemy's 
resistances is highest.
Critical Success The GM chooses two pieces of information 
about the enemy to tell you. If a monster doesn't have an 
appropriate strength or weakness (such as if it doesn't 
have any weaknesses or immunities), the GM can't choose 
that piece of information.
Critical Failure
 The GM gives you false information (the GM 
makes up the information).
DREAD STRIKER FEAT 4
 You capitalize on your enemies' fear to slip past 
their defenses. Any creature that is frightened is also flat-footed 
against your attacks.
 POISON WEAPON FEAT 4
 Requirements
 You are wielding a piercing or 
slashing weapon and have one hand free.
You apply a poison to the required weapon. Your next attack with 
that weapon before the end of your next turn gains the following 
enhancement. If you miss, the poison is wasted.
Enhancement (Poison)
 You apply the effects of a poison you 
have collected or purchased, provided it can be delivered 
by contact or injury. If you have no such poisons, you 
can instead deliver a simple poison that deals 1d4 poison 
damage. You can only deliver a simple poison in this manner 
a number of times per day equal to your level.
 REACTIVE PURSUIT FEAT 4
 Trigger
 An adjacent enemy moves away from you 
and ends its movement in a space where you can 
reach at least one adjacent space with a Stride action.
You Stride, but must end this move adjacent to the triggering 
enemy. This move does not provoke reactions from the triggering 
enemy. You can use Reactive Pursuit while Burrowing, Climbing, 
Flying, or Swimming instead of Striding if you have the 
corresponding movement type.
 RUNNING RELOAD FEAT 4
 You Stride, Step, or Sneak, and then Interact to 
reload a ranged weapon.
Rogue
Secret
Rogue
Manipulate
Rogue
Move
Rogue
Rogue
 SABOTAGE FEAT 4
 Requirements
 You must have a free hand.
Choose one item that a creature within your reach wields or 
carries. The item must have moving parts that you could possibly 
sabotage (a shortbow could be sabotaged, but a longsword 
could not). Attempt a Thievery check against the Reflex DC of 
the creature. 
Success The item gains 1 Dent. Critical Success You break the item.
Critical Failure
 The item is bolstered against your sabotage.
 SCOUT'S WARNING FEAT 4
 Trigger
 You are about to roll a Perception check 
for initiative.
You audibly or visually warn your allies of imminent danger. Any 
ally who is able to hear you (if you audibly warn them) or see 
you (if you visually warn them) gains a +1 circumstance bonus to 
their initiative roll.
UNBALANCING BLOW FEAT 4
 Whenever your Strike is a critical hit, you can 
apply the following enhancement.
Enhancement The enemy is flat-footed against your attacks 
until the end of your next turn.
6TH LEVEL
BLINDflFIGHT FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 master in Perception
You are more aware of concealed and invisible enemies. If you 
are adjacent to an unseen creature of your level or lower, you 
treat it as sensed. When you are adjacent to a sensed creature, 
you treat it as concealed. When adjacent to a concealed creature, 
you treat it as though it weren't concealed.
GANG UP FEAT 6
 You treat an enemy as flat-footed against your 
melee attacks due to flanking as long as both you and an ally 
threaten that enemy, even if you and the ally aren't in a position 
that is usually considered flanking. Your allies must still flank an 
enemy to treat it as flat-footed.
LIGHT STEP FEAT 6
 When you take the Stride or Step action, you can 
ignore difficult terrain.
 SKIRMISH STRIKE FEAT 6
 Either Step and then Strike, or Strike and then Step. You take a –1 penalty to the attack roll on 
your Strike.
 TWIST THE KNIFE FEAT 6
 Requirements
 Your last action was a Strike that 
dealt sneak attack damage to a flat-footed target.
You deal persistent bleed damage to the target equal to one die 
less than your sneak attack damage dice. For example, if you 
Rogue
Rogue
Rogue
Rogue
Rogue
Rogue
Attack
Move
Rogue
Rogue
123have sneak attack 2d6, you could use Twist the Knife to deal 1d6 
persistent bleed damage to the target.8TH LEVEL
 DELAY TRAP FEAT 8
 Trigger
 A trap within your reach is triggered.
Attempt a Thievery check to disable a device on the trap; the DC 
to do so is increased by 5, and the effects are as follows.
Success The trap's activation is delayed until the end of your 
next turn or the trap is not triggered (whichever is worse, 
GM's choice).
Critical Success You prevent the trap from being triggered, or 
you delay the activation until the start or end of your next 
turn (your choice).
Failure
 No efiect. Critical Failure
 You are flat-footed until the start of your 
next turn.
IMPROVED POISON WEAPON FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Poison Weapon
When you apply a simple poison with Poison Weapon, the 
poison enhancement deals 2d4 extra poison damage instead of 
1d4 extra. In addition, you don't waste a poison you apply with 
Poison Weapon on a failed attack roll (though you still waste it 
on a critical failure).
NIMBLE ROLL FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Nimble DodgeYou can trigger Nimble Dodge when you need to attempt 
a Reflex saving throw against an efiect, in addition to when 
you are targeted by a melee or ranged attack. If you do, the 
circumstance bonus applies to your Reflex save against the 
triggering efiect. When you use Nimble Dodge and the triggering attack fails 
or critically fails, or when you succeed or critically succeed at 
the saving throw, you can also Stride up to 10 feet as part of the 
reaction. If you do, the reaction gains the move trait. You can use 
Nimble Roll while Flying or Swimming instead of Striding if you 
have the corresponding movement type.
 OPPORTUNE BACKSTAB FEAT 8
 Trigger
 A creature within your melee reach is 
hit by a melee attack from one of your allies.
Make a Strike against the triggering creature and take a 
–2 penalty to the attack roll. You can't deal sneak attack 
damage with this Strike unless your ally's attack was part 
of a reaction.
 SIDESTEP FEAT 8
 Trigger
 The attack roll for a Strike targeting you 
fails or critically fails. You redirect the attack to a creature of your choice that is 
adjacent to you and within the reach of the triggering attack. 
The attacker rerolls the Strike's attack roll at the same multiple 
attack penalty against the new target.
Rogue
Rogue
Rogue
Rogue
Rogue
SLY STRIKER FEAT 8
 Your attacks deal more damage, even against 
creatures that aren't flat-footed. When you succeed or critically 
succeed at a Strike's attack roll against a creature that isn't flat-
footed, you deal extra precision damage equal to half your sneak 
attack damage. Roll your full sneak attack damage dice, and then 
halve the result. This applies only if you're using a weapon or 
unarmed attack you could deal sneak attack damage with.
Rogue
12410TH LEVEL
SNEAK SAVANT FEAT 10

Prerequisite
 master in StealthWhen you attempt a Sneak action, you treat a failure as a 
success. You can still critically fail.
TACTICAL DEBILITATIONS FEAT 10

Prerequisites
 Debilitating Strike
You learn new debilitations that grant you tactical advantages 
against your foes. When you use Debilitating Strike, add the 
following debilitations to the list you can choose from.
Debilitation
 Your actions and reactions don't trigger the 
target's reactions.
Debilitation
 The target can't flank, nor can it contribute to its 
allies' flanking.
VICIOUS DEBILITATIONS FEAT 10

Prerequisites
 Debilitating Strike
The debilitations you dish out seriously impair your foes. When 
you use Debilitating Strike, add the following debilitations to the 
list you can choose from.
Debilitation
 The target gains weakness 5 to your choice of 
bludgeoning, piercing, or slashing damage.
Debilitation
 The target becomes sluggish 1.12TH LEVEL
CRITICAL DEBILITATION FEAT 12

Prerequisites
 Debilitating Strike
Whenever you critically succeed at an attack roll against an 
enemy and use Debilitating Strike, add the following debilitation 
to the list you can choose from.
Debilitation
 The target attempts a Fortitude save against your 
class DC with the following effects.
Success The target is slowed 1 until the end of your next turn.
Critical Success The target is unafiected. Failure
 The target is slowed 2 until the end of your next turn.
Critical Failure
 The target is paralyzed until the end of your 
next turn.
 FANTASTIC LEAP FEAT 12

Attempt a High Jump or Long Jump. If you attempt 
a High Jump, determine the distance you can travel 
using the scale of a Long Jump, to a maximum of 30 feet up. At 
the end of your jump, you can make a melee Strike.
After your Strike, you fall to the ground if you're in the air. If 
the distance of your fall is no more than the height of your jump, 
you take no damage and land upright.
 FELLING SHOT FEAT 12

Your ranged attacks can shoot an unprepared 
foe right out of the air. Make a Strike with a 
ranged weapon or a thrown weapon against a flat-footed 
creature. If the Strike is a success, you can apply the 
following
 enhancement. Rogue
Rogue
Rogue
Rogue
Move
Rogue
Attack
Rogue
Enhancement The target must attempt a Reflex save against 
your class DC with the following effects.
Success The target is unafiected. Failure
 The target falls up to 120 feet. If it hits the ground, it 
takes no damage from the fall.
Critical Failure
 As a failure, and the target can't fly, jump, 
levitate, or otherwise leave the ground until the end of your 
next turn.
14TH LEVEL
 DEFENSIVE ROLL FEAT 14

Trigger
 A physical attack would reduce you to 
0 Hit Points.
Frequency
 once per 10 minutesYou can absorb a lethal attack and stay conscious. You take half 
damage from the triggering attack.
 INSTANT OPENING FEAT 14

With some form of distracting action, whether 
it's a few choice words, a distraction, or a rude 
gesture, you distract your opponent. Choose a target within 30 
feet. It's flat-footed against your attacks until the end of your 
next turn.
 SENSE THE UNSEEN FEAT 14

Trigger
 You use the Seek action.
You automatically sense any unseen creatures in the area.
 SPRING FROM THE SHADOWS FEAT 14

You Stride up to your Speed, but you must end 
your movement next to an enemy you're sensed or unseen 
by. You then make a Strike against that enemy. You can use 
Spring from the Shadows while Burrowing, Climbing, Flying, 
or Swimming instead of Striding if you have the corresponding 
movement type.
16TH LEVEL
BLANK SLATE FEAT 16

Prerequisites
 legendary in DeceptionYour deceptions confound even the most powerful mortal 
divinations. You're immune to detection, revelation, and scrying 
unless the efiect is a 10th-level spell cast by a creature, hazard, 
or item whose level exceeds 20th.
CLOUD STEP FEAT 16

When you Stride, you can move across water, air, 
and solid surfaces that can hold only limited weight as if they 
were normal ground. If you Stride over a trap with a weight-
sensitive pressure plate, you don't trigger it. At the end of your 
turn, you sink, fall, break fragile surfaces, or trigger traps as 
normal for your current location.
 COGNITIVE LOOPHOLE FEAT 16

Requirements
 You are currently afiected by a 
Rogue
Concentrate
Rogue
Rogue
Rogue
Rogue
Rogue
Rogue
Rogue
125mental efiect that you gained by failing, but not critically failing, 
a saving throw.
Trigger
 Your turn ends.
You can find a loophole in a mental efiect to temporarily overcome 
it. Until the end of your next turn, you ignore all mental effects of a 
single ability against which you failed, but not critically failed, the 
saving throw. You can suppress a particular efiect using Cognitive 
Loophole only once.
Special You can take this reaction even if the mental efiect is 
preventing you from taking reactions.
 DISPELLING SLICE FEAT 16

Your sneak attack slices through the threads 
binding magic to a target. Make a Strike against a flat-footed 
creature. If your Strike deals sneak attack damage, you can apply 
the following enhancement.
Enhancement You attempt to counteract a single spell active on 
the target. Your counteract level is equal to half your rogue 
level rounded up, with a bonus equal to your class DC – 10.
PERFECT DISTRACTION FEAT 16

Prerequisites
 legendary in DeceptionRequirements
 You Sneak and your roll's result exceeded your 
enemy's Perception DC for all its senses.
You use smoke and mirrors, decoys on ropes, or other clever 
tactics to mislead your foes. Gain the benefits of the spell 
mislead, except you aren't invisible, just unseen. You can continue to 
concentrate to move your decoy, per the spell, whether or not 
you remain hidden throughout the duration.
18TH LEVEL
 IMPLAUSIBLE INFILTRATION FEAT 18

Prerequisites
 legendary in Acrobatics
Requirements
 You are adjacent to a floor or 
vertical wall.
You move directly through the wall or floor from one side to the 
other. Your attempt to move through it fails if the wall or floor is 
made of something other than wood, plaster, or stone; is thicker 
than 10 feet; or contains even a thin layer of metal. If you have a 
climb Speed, you can move through a ceiling.
 REACTIVE INTERFERENCE FEAT 18

Trigger
 An adjacent enemy begins to use a reaction.
If the triggering creature is your level or lower, you disrupt the 
triggering reaction. If the triggering creature is higher-level than 
you, you must succeed at an attack roll against its AC. On a 
success, you disrupt the action.
 TRICKSTER'S ACE FEAT 18

Requirements
 When you make your daily 
preparations, you must specify a trigger for this 
reaction using the same restrictions as the triggers for a Readied 
Action. You also choose a single spell from the arcane, divine, 
occult, or primal list of 4th level or lower. The spell can't have a 
cost, nor can its casting time be more than 10 minutes. The spell 
Rogue
Rogue
Move
Rogue
Rogue
Concentrate
Rogue
must be able to target a single creature, and you must be a valid 
target for it. Trigger
 You specify the trigger when you make your daily 
preparations (see Requirements above).
Whether from jury-rigged magic items, stolen magical essence, 
or other means, you have a contingency in your back pocket for 
desperate situations. You cause the chosen spell to come into 
efiect. The spell targets only you, no matter how many creatures 
it would afiect normally. If you define particularly complicated 
conditions, as determined by the GM, the trigger might fail.
20TH LEVEL
 HIDDEN PARAGON FEAT 20

Prerequisite
 legendary in StealthFrequency
 once per hourTrigger
 You successfully use Stealth to Hide and become sensed 
to all of your current foes or use Stealth to Sneak and become 
unseen to all your current foes.
You become invisible for 1 minute, even if you act in a hostile 
manner. Not even 
see invisibility, glitterdust, or similar effects can reveal you, though creatures can still use the Seek action to 
sense you as normal.
 REACTIVE DISTRACTION FEAT 20

Prerequisites
 Perfect Distraction, legendary in 
DeceptionTrigger
 You would be hit by an attack or targeted 
by an efiect, or you are within an efiect's area.
You can Stride up to half your Speed to an appropriate location 
to use the Hide action and then gain the effects of the mislead spell, though you are unseen rather than invisible. Your decoy is 
targeted by the attack or efiect instead of you. In the case of an 
area efiect, if you don't move out of the area, both you and the 
decoy are targeted by its efiect. You can use Reactive Distraction 
while Burrowing, Climbing, Flying, or Swimming instead of 
Striding if you have the corresponding movement type.
Rogue
Concentrate
Manipulate
Rogue
126 You didn't choose to become a spellcaster—you were born one. There's 
magic in your blood, whether divinity touched one of your ancestors, a 
forebear communed with a primal creature, or a powerful occult ritual 
has influenced your line. Regardless, self-reflection and study allow you 
to reflne your inherent magical skills and continuously unlock new 
and more powerful abilities. The power in your blood carries a risk, 
however, and you constantly face the choice of whether you'll rise to 
become a master spellcaster or fall into destruction.
SORCERER127 KEY ABILITYCharismaHIT POINTS6 + your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
PERCEPTION
Trained
SAVING THROWS
Trained in Fortitude
Trained in Reflex
Expert in WillSKILLS
Trained in a number of skills equal to 
 5 + your Intelligence modifier
WEAPONS
Trained in simple weapons
ARMORUntrained in all armorSPELLS
Trained in arcane, divine, occult, or 
primal spell rolls and DCs, as well as 
attack rolls in the same tradition, as 
indicated by your bloodline (see pages 
129–130)
SIGNATURE SKILLS
CraftingOne or more determined by your bloodline 
PLAYING A SORCERER
Players of sorcerer characters might approach gameplay in the following ways:
Ł During combat, you use your spells to strike down enemies by injuring them, 
influencing their minds, or hampering their movements. You're probably too frail 
to get into melee combat, though your bloodline might give you abilities that let 
you hold your own in a brawl. Though you have powerful magic, sometimes you'll 
need to resort to using your cantrips to conserve your best spells, or because 
you've used up your most powerful spells for the day. 

Ł During social encounters, your natural charisma means you're good at interacting 
with people.
Ł In exploration mode, you can detect magic that might be around you, finding treasures 
or warning your adventuring group of magical traps. When you come across mysteries 
or problems related to your bloodline, you can set yourself to solving them.

Ł In downtime mode, you might craft magic items or scribe scrolls. Your bloodline might 
drive you to research your ancestry or to associate with people or creatures afiliated 
with your bloodline.
ROLEPLAYING A SORCERER
Players may want to consider the following roleplaying suggestions for their sorcerer characters. IF YOU'RE A SORCERER, YOU LIKELY...

Ł Have a strong independent streak, and while you may embrace or reject your 
magical heritage, you long to distinguish yourself as a spellcaster and individual in 
your own right.

Ł View your lineage with a mix of fascination and fear—anything from wholehearted 
acceptance to vehement rejection.

Ł Rely on magic items, such as scrolls and wands, to expand your limited selection 
of spells. OTHERS PROBABLY...

Ł Marvel at your ability to create magic from thin air, and view your abilities with 
equal parts mistrust and admiration.

Ł Consider you less dedicated than studious wizards, devoted clerics, and other 
practitioners of magic, since power comes to you naturally.

Ł Assume you're as unpredictable and chaotic as the magic you bring forth, even if 
your personality proves otherwise.
CLASS FEATURES
You gain these abilities as a sorcerer. Abilities gained at higher levels list the 
requisite levels next to the features' names. 
BLOODLINE
You choose one bloodline to represent the magical ancestry that gives you 
your spellcasting talent. This choice determines the type of spells you cast, the spell list from which you choose your spells, additional spells you learn, and additional signature skills you gain. You also gain Spell Points and special 
powers based on your bloodline. See Bloodlines on pages 129–130, and Casting Spells on pages 195–196.The bloodlines presented in this book are as follows:
Ł Aberrant An unknowable and strange influence gives you occult spells.

Ł Angelic Holy grace gives you divine spells.

Ł Demonic A malign corruption gives you divine spells.

Ł Draconic The blood of dragons gives you arcane spells.

Ł Fey
 Influence from fey or other creatures of the First World gives you primal spells.

Ł Imperial An ancient power gives you arcane spells.
128 TABLE 3–19: SORCERER ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level
Class Features
1 Ancestry feat, background, bloodline, bloodline power, 
initial proficiencies, sorcerer spellcasting, spell repertoire
2 Skill feat, sorcerer feat
32nd-level spells, general feat, skill increase, 
spontaneous heightening4 Skill feat, sorcerer feat
53rd-level spells, ability boosts, ancestry feat, 
skill increase
6 Advanced bloodline power (Spell Point increase), 
skill feat
74th-level spells, general feat, skill increase
8 Skill feat, sorcerer feat
95th-level spells, ancestry feat, skill increase
10 Ability boosts, greater bloodline power (Spell Point 
increase), skill feat
116th-level spells, general feat, skill increase
12 Expert spellcaster, skill feat
137th-level spells, ancestry feat, skill increase
14 Skill feat, sorcerer feat
158th-level spells, ability boosts, general feat, 
skill increase
16 Master spellcaster, skill feat
179th-level spells, ancestry feat, skill increase
18 Skill feat, sorcerer feat
19 General feat, legendary spellcaster, skill increase
20 Ability boosts, skill feat, sorcerer FEATS
ORCERER SPELLCASTINGYou have the power to cast spells using the Cast a Spell 
activity, and you gain access to the Material Casting, 
Somatic Casting, and Verbal Casting actions (see Casting 
Spells on pages 195–196). Because you're a sorcerer, you 
can usually replace Material Casting actions with Somatic 
Casting actions, so you usually don't need spell components.
Each day, you can cast up to two 1st-level spells, plus 
an extra 1st-level spell due to the power of your bloodline. 
The number of spells you can cast each day are called 
your spell slots. You must know spells to cast them, and 
you learn them via the spell repertoire class feature. As 
you increase in level as a sorcerer, your number of spells 
per day and the highest level of spells you can cast from 
spell slots increases, as shown on the Sorcerer Spells per 
Day table on page 129.Some of your spells require you to attempt a spell roll 
to see how effective they are, or have your enemies roll 
against your spell DC. Since your key ability is Charisma, 
your spell rolls and spell DCs use your Charisma modifier. 
See page 291 for details on calculating your spell rolls and 
spell DCs. Heightening SpellsWhen you get spell slots of 2nd level and higher, you 
can heighten lower-level spells to higher levels. You must 
learn them at the new level to do so, as described on page 192. The spontaneous heightening class feature lets you select two spells you can heighten freely.
Cantrips
Some of your spells are cantrips. A cantrip is a special 
type of spell that doesn't use spell slots. You can cast a 
cantrip at will, any number of times per day. A cantrip 
is always automatically heightened to the highest level 
of spell you can cast as a sorcerer. For example, as a 1st-
level sorcerer, the highest level of spell you can cast is 
1st, so your cantrips are 1st-level spells. As a 5th-level 
sorcerer, the highest level of spell you can cast is 3rd, so 
your cantrips are 3rd-level spells. SPELL
 REPERTOIRE
At 1st level, you learn two 1st-level spells of your choice 
and four cantrips of your choice, as well as an additional 
spell and cantrip from your bloodline (see page 130). 
You choose these from the common spells on the spell 
list corresponding to your bloodline in this book, or from 
other spells on that spell list to which you gain access. You 
can cast any spell in your spell repertoire by using a spell slot of an appropriate spell level. You add to this spell repertoire as you increase in level. 
Each time you get a spell slot from Table 3–20, you add 
a spell to your spell repertoire of the same level. So when 
you reach 2nd level, you select another 1st-level spell; at 
3rd level, you select two 2nd-level spells, and at 4th level 
you select a 2nd-level spell. Each time you learn spells of 
a new spell level, your bloodline also grants you both a new 
spell and a new spell slot of that level. As with other spell 
slots, you can use this bonus slot to cast any spell, not just the 
one your bloodline gave you. Though you gain them at the same rate, your spell slots and spell repertoire are separate. If a feat or other ability adds a spell to your spell repertoire, it wouldn't give you 
another spell slot, and vice versa. Swapping Spells in Your Repertoire
As you gain new spells in your repertoire, you might want 
to replace some of the spells you previously learned. Each 
time you level up and learn new spells, you can swap out 
one of your old spells for a different spell of the same
 level. 
This spell can be a cantrip. You can also swap out spells by 
retraining during downtime (see page 318).SKILL FEATS 2ND
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill 
feat. Skill feats can be found in Chapter 5 and have the skill 
trait. You must be trained or better in the corresponding 
skill to select a skill feat. SORCERER FEATS 2ND
At 2nd level, you gain a sorcerer class feat. You gain 
another at 4th, 8th, 14th, 18th, and 20th levels.129 TABLE 3–20: SORCERER SPELLS PER DAY*
Your
Spell Level
Level
1st2nd3rd
4th5th6th7th8th9th12————————23————————332———————433———————5332——————6333——————73332—————83333—————933332————1033333————11333332———12333333———133333332——143333333——1533333332—1633333333—17333333332183333333331933333333320333333333* In addition to the spell slots shown in this table, your bloodline 
gives you a bonus spell slot of each level you can cast.
GENERAL FEATS 3RD
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a 
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.SKILL
 INCREASES 3RD
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a 
skill increase. You can use this increase to either become 
trained in one skill you're untrained in, or to become an 
expert in one skill in which you're already trained. If you are at least 7th level, you can use this increase 
to become a master in a signature skill in which you're 
already an expert. If you are at least 15th level, you can 
use this increase to become legendary in a signature skill 
in which you're already a master.
SPONTANEOUS HEIGHTENING
 3RD
You learn to freely heighten some of your spells, even 
if you know only the base version of the spell. During 
your daily preparations (see page 192), you can pick up 
to two spells you know. You can cast those spells using 
any applicable higher-level spell slots you may have, 
heightening the spell to the level of spell slot used, even 
if you don't ordinarily know the spell at the higher level.
ABILITY
 BOOSTS 5TH
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four 
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to 
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability score increases it by 1 if it's already 18 or above, or by 2 
if it starts out below 18.ANCESTRY FEATS 5TH
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain 
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter. 
The list of ancestry feats open to you can be found in your 
ancestry's entry in Chapter 2.
EXPERT SPELLCASTER 12TH
Your proficiency rank for spell rolls, spell DCs, and attack 
rolls for your bloodline's type of spells increases to expert.
MASTER SPELLCASTER 16TH
Your proficiency rank for spell rolls, spell DCs, and attack 
rolls for your bloodline's type of spells increases to master.
LEGENDARY SPELLCASTER 19TH
Your proficiency rank for spell rolls, spell DCs, and attack 
rolls for your bloodline's type of spells increases to legendary.
BLOODLINESYour magical power comes from your bloodline. Choose a 
bloodline as the source of your power. This bloodline has a 
major influence on your abilities, primarily by determining 
your spell list and the type of spells you cast. Your bloodline also grants you bloodline powers, which 
are special spells unique to sorcerers of your lineage, and 
a pool of Spell Points you can use to cast these powers. 
You can cast a bloodline power only by spending 1 or 
more Spell Points, not by using spell slots. Like cantrips, 
bloodline powers are automatically heightened to the 
highest level of spell you can cast. 
At 1st level, your maximum number of Spell Points is equal to your key ability modifier. As you gain advanced 
and greater bloodline powers, you also gain additional 
Spell Points, as indicated in your bloodline next to the power's entry. You refresh all your Spell Points during 
daily preparations. READING
 A BLOODLINE
 ENTRY
A bloodline entry contains the following information. Spell List: You use this magical tradition and spell list.
Bloodline Signature Skills: You are trained in the listed 
skills and add them to your signature skills. Granted Spells: You automatically learn the spells 
listed here. At 1st level, you gain a cantrip and a 1st-level 
spell. You learn the other spells on the list as soon as you 
become able to cast sorcerer spells of that level. Whenever 
you gain a spell from your bloodline, you also gain a spell 
slot of that level, which you can use to cast any sorcerer 
spell, not just the spell granted by your bloodline. For 
instance, at sorcerer level 3, you'd learn the 2nd-level spell 
from your bloodline and gain another 2nd-level spell slot 
to cast any of your sorcerer spells. Bloodline Powers: You gain these powers 
automatically—the initial power at 1st level, the advanced power at 6th level, and the greater power at 
130 Granted Spells Cantrip: detect magic; 1st: fear; 2nd: resist energy; 3rd: 
slow; 4th: divine wrath; 5th: banishment; 6th: disintegrate; 7th: divine decree; 8th: power word stun; 9th: meteor swarm
Bloodline Powers
 Initial Power: 
glutton's jaws; Advanced Power: 
swamp of sloth
 (2); Greater Power: 
abyssal wrath
 (2)DRACONIC
The blood of dragons flows through your veins. These 
beasts are both fearsome in combat and skilled at magic, 
and you follow in their grand tradition. Spell List arcane (see pages 199–200)
Signature Skills
 Acrobatics, Arcana, Athletics, Intimidation
Granted Spells Cantrip: detect magic; 1st: fear; 2nd: resist energy; 3rd: 
enthrall; 4th: fiy; 5th: chromatic wall; 6th: dragon form; 7th: flnger of death; 8th: power word stun; 9th: meteor swarm
Bloodline Powers
 Initial Power: 
dragon claws; Advanced Power: 
dragon breath
 (2); Greater Power: 
dragon wings
 (2)Dragon Type
At 1st level, choose the type of dragon that influenced your bloodline. This will affect how some of your bloodline powers function. You can't change your dragon 
type later. The good metallic dragons and their associated 
damage types are brass (fire), bronze (electricity), copper (acid), gold (fire), and silver (cold). The evil chromatic dragons and their associated damage types are black 
(acid), blue (electricity), green (poison), red (fire), and white (cold).FEY
A tryst in a moonlit grove or exposure to fey magic put 
the enchantment of the First World into your family's 
bloodline. You can be capricious and emotional as the fey.
Spell List primal (see pages 201–202)
Signature Skills
 Arcana, Deception, Diplomacy, Nature
Granted Spells Cantrip: ghost sound; 1st: charm; 2nd: hideous laughter; 3rd: 
enthrall; 4th: 
freedom of movement; 5th: 
passwall; 6th: mislead; 7th: regenerate; 8th: irresistible dance; 9th: storm of vengeance
Bloodline Powers
 Initial Power: 
faerie dust; Advanced Power: 
fey 
disappearance
 (2); Greater Power: 
ridiculous notion (2)IMPERIAL
Ancient mortals mastered magical traditions, and one of 
your distant ancestors was among them. Though such 
magical blood might remain latent for generations, in you 
it manifested in full. Spell List arcane (see pages 199–200)
Signature Skills
 Arcana, Diplomacy, Intimidation, Society
Granted Spells
 Cantrip: detect magic; 1st: fear; 2nd: invisibility; 3rd: 
dispel magic; 4th: dimension door; 5th: arcane eye; 6th: teleport; 7th: prismatic spray; 8th: power word stun; 9th: prismatic sphere
Bloodline Powers
 Initial Power: 
ancestral surge; Advanced 
Power: 
metamagician's shortcut
 (2); Greater Power: 
arcane 
countermeasure
 (2)THE BLESSED AND THE DAMNED
Many bloodlines are tied to certain types of creatures, and 
the reputations of those creatures might color how people 
see you. Having the blood of demons might make people fear 
you; conversely, people of good faiths might assume your 
angelic blood puts you on their side. These preconceptions 
have little bearing on reality, and you can easily do good deeds 
with demonic powers. Having a bloodline tied to creatures 
of a certain alignment doesn't have any effect on your own 
alignment unless you want it to; your magic is disconnected 
from its source. That said, many sorcerers seek out creatures 
or organizations associated with their bloodlines, which can 
expose them to these forces' influences.
10th level. Initial powers always cost 1 Spell Point; the cost for later powers is listed in parentheses. When you gain an advanced or greater power, increase your Spell 
Point pool by the number of points the power costs to cast. As noted earlier, a bloodline power can be cast only 
by using Spell Points, not by using spell slots. ABERRANT
Something speaks to you from beyond the stars or below 
the earth. Ancient and unknowable, this alien influence 
presses against your mind, but grants you power. Whether 
that power will come with consequences, who can say?Spell List occult (see pages 200–201)
Signature Skills
 Acrobatics, Intimidation, Occultism, Stealth
Granted Spells Cantrip: daze; 1st: phantom pain; 2nd: enlarge; 3rd: 
mind reading; 4th: confusion; 5th: black tentacles; 6th: feeblemind; 7th: warp mind; 8th: mind blank; 9th: shapechangeBloodline Powers
 Initial Power: 
tentacular limbs; Advanced Power: 
aberrant whispers
 (2); Greater Power: 
unusual anatomy (2)ANGELIC
One of your forebears was an angel from one of the 
celestial realms, or your ancestors showed such devotion 
that their lineage was blessed through divine intervention. Spell List divine (see page 200)Signature Skills
 Diplomacy, Intimidation, Medicine, Religion
Granted SpellsflCantrip: light; 1st
 : bless; 2nd: restoration; 3rd: 
searing light; 4th: divine wrath; 5th: flame strike; 6th: blade barrier; 7th: divine decree; 8th: divine aura; 9th: foresight
Bloodline Powers
 Initial Power: 
angelic halo; Advanced Power: 
angelic wings (2); Greater Power: 
celestial brand
 (2)DEMONIC
The demons of the Abyss debase all they touch, and 
one of your ancestors fell victim to their corruption. 
You're burdened with dark thoughts and the desire for 
destruction. This urge can be overcome if you choose to 
fight it, but the beauty of sin calls to you always. Spell List divine (see page 200)Signature Skills
 Athletics, Deception, Intimidation, Religion
131 SORCERER FEATS
At every level at which you gain a sorcerer feat, you can select one of the 
following feats. You must satisfy any prerequisites before taking the feat.
1ST LEVEL
 COUNTERSPELL FEAT 1
 Trigger
 A creature casts a spell that you have in your repertoire.
Requirements 
You must have an unexpended spell slot of the triggering 
spell's level.
You expend one of your spell slots to counter the triggering creature's casting of a spell 
that you have in your repertoire. You lose your spell slot as if you had cast the triggering 
spell. You then attempt to dispel the triggering spell (see Dispelling on page 197).
Special This feat has the trait corresponding to the type of spells you cast (arcane, 
divine, natural, or occult).
DANGEROUS SORCERY FEAT 1
 When you cast a non-cantrip spell that deals damage and that doesn't have 
a duration, you gain a conditional bonus to that spell's damage equal to the spell's level.
FAMILIAR FEAT 1
 An animal serves you and assists your spellcasting. You gain a familiar (see 
page 287). REACH SPELL FEAT 1
 Trigger
 You start to cast a spell that has a range. The spell must have a 
maximum of two spellcasting actions.
You add a Somatic Casting action to the casting of the triggering spell to increase its 
range by 30 feet. If the spell normally has a range of touch, you instead extend its range 
to 30 feet, and if the touch spell normally requires an attack roll or a touch attack roll, it 
now requires a ranged attack roll or a ranged touch attack roll, as appropriate.
 WIDEN SPELL FEAT 1
 Trigger
 You start to cast a spell that has an area of a burst, cone, or line, 
and that does not have a duration. The spell must have a maximum of two 
spellcasting actions. You add a Somatic Casting action to the casting of the triggering spell and increase the 
area of that spell. You add 5 feet to the radius of a burst that normally has a radius of at 
least 10 feet. You add 5 feet to the length of a cone or line that is normally 15 feet long 
or smaller, and add 10 feet to the length of a larger cone or line.
4TH LEVEL
ARCANE EVOLUTION FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 bloodline that grants arcane spells
You become trained in one skill of your choice. Additionally, each time you 
make your daily preparations, you can choose one scroll in your possession and add the 
scroll's spell to your repertoire until the next time you prepare. If the scroll leaves your 
person or if the spell is expended from the scroll, you immediately forget the spell.
CANTRIP EXPANSION FEAT 4
 Add two additional cantrips of your choice from your spell list to your repertoire.
 CONCEAL SPELL FEAT 4
 Trigger
 You start to cast a spell that has a maximum of two spellcasting 
actions. Abjuration
Sorcerer
Sorcerer
Sorcerer
MetamagicSorcerer
MetamagicSorcerer
Arcane
Sorcerer
Sorcerer
MetamagicSorcerer
KEY TERMSYou'll see the following key terms in many 
sorcerer abilities. 
Metamagic: Feats with the metamagic 
trait allow you to tweak the properties 
of your spells. These feats are triggered 
when you begin casting a spell, and 
typically require you to spend an additional 
spellcasting action to alter the spell's 
effects. You can't use metamagic feats if 
adding an action to the spell would make 
the spell require more actions than you 
have remaining on your turn. Because most 
metamagic feats have the same trigger, you 
usually can't use more than one metamagic 
feat per spell.
SORCERER FEATS
If you need to look up a sorcerer feat by 
name instead of by level, use this table.
Feat
Level
Arcane Evolution
4 Archmage's Might
20 Blood Magic8 Bloodline Resistance
8 Cantrip Expansion4 Conceal Spell4 Counterspell1 Dangerous Sorcery
1 Divine Evolution
4 Effiortless Concentration
14 Enhanced Familiar
4 Familiar
1 Magic Sense14 Magical Striker4 Metamagic Mastery20 Occult Evolution
4 Overwhelming Spell
8 Primal Evolution
4 Quickened Casting8 Reach Spell
1 reflect Spell
14 Resilient Concentration
4STeady Spellcasting4 Swift Dispel
14 Vicious Concentration
4 Wellspring Spell
20 Widen Spell1132 You add a Somatic Casting action to the casting of the triggering 
spell and attempt a Stealth check against one or more observers' 
Perception DCs. If you beat an observer's Perception DC, that 
observer doesn't notice you are casting a spell; if the spell has 
a Verbal Casting action, you must also roll a Deception check 
against the observer's Perception DC, or the observer notices the 
spell. This conceals only the spell's spellcasting actions, not any 
of the spell's physical effects, so an observer might still see a ray 
streak out from you or see you disappear.
DIVINE EVOLUTION FEAT 4
 Prerequisites 
bloodline that grants divine spells
You can channel energy, per the cleric class 
feature, once per day. If you already have the channel energy 
class feature, you instead gain one additional use per day.
ENHANCED FAMILIAR FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Familiar
You enhance your familiar by infusing it with additional magical 
energy. You can select four familiar or master options each day, 
instead of two.
 MAGICAL STRIKER FEAT 4
 Trigger 
You finish casting a non-cantrip spell on 
your turn.
You siphon residual spell energy into one weapon you're wielding. 
If the weapon is nonmagical, it becomes a 
+1 magic weapon, and one that's already a magic weapon increases its bonus by 1 (from 
a +1 magic weapon
 to a +2 magic weapon, and so on). This benefit applies only to the next Strike you make on your turn, and is 
wasted if you don't Strike by the end of your turn. You can gain 
the benefit of Magical Striker only once per turn. OCCULT EVOLUTION FEAT 4
 Prerequisites 
bloodline that grants occult spells
You become trained in one skill of your choice. 
Additionally, once per day, you can spend 1 minute to choose one 
mental occult spell you don't know and add that spell to your 
repertoire for the day. You lose this temporary spell the next 
time you make your daily preparations (though you can choose 
to prepare it again).
PRIMAL EVOLUTION FEAT 4
 Prerequisites 
bloodline that grants primal spells
You can cast 
summon nature's ally
 as an innate 
primal spell once per day. The spell is automatically heightened 
to the highest level of spell you can cast.
RESILIENT CONCENTRATION FEAT 4
 When you Concentrate on a Spell that affects 
one or more of your allies, you grant any one of those allies 
resistance 1 to a physical or energy damage type of your choice. 
If you Concentrate on the Spell a second time, double this base 
resistance, and if you Concentrate on the Spell a third time, triple 
this base resistance. The resistance ends when the spell ends. 
You cannot add resistance in the same round you first cast the 
DivineSorcerer
Sorcerer
Sorcerer
OccultSorcerer
PrimalSorcerer
Sorcerer
spell, and you can increase the resistance in this way only once 
per round per spell (track resistance separately for each casting 
of an eligible spell). The base resistance granted the first round increases to 2 
when you reach 8th level and to 3 when you reach 14th level.
STEADY SPELLCASTING FEAT 4
 Your spells are disrupted by reactions (see page 
196) only if you take damage equal to or greater than double 
your character level.
VICIOUS CONCENTRATION FEAT 4
 When you Concentrate on a Spell that deals damage, 
one creature of your choice that takes damage from the spell takes 
an additional 1 damage. If you Concentrate on the Spell a second 
time, double this additional damage, and if you Concentrate on the 
Spell a third time, triple this additional damage. This extra damage 
ends when the spell ends. You cannot deal extra damage in the 
same round you first cast the spell, and you can deal extra damage 
in this way only once per round per spell (track damage separately 
for each casting of an eligible spell). 
The additional damage dealt the first round increases to 2 if 
you're 8th level and to 3 if you're 14th level.
8TH LEVEL
BLOOD MAGIC FEAT 8

The magical potency of your spilled blood 
empowers your spells. Anytime you cast a non-
cantrip spell while you have persistent bleed damage, you can 
give yourself or any target affected by that spell temporary Hit 
Points equal to 1d6 + the spell's level.
You can use an Interact action to cut yourself, dealing yourself 
1 slashing damage and 1 persistent bleed damage. This persistent damage ends using the normal rules for persistent damage. BLOODLINE RESISTANCE FEAT 8
 Your innate magic makes you more resistant 
to others' magic. You gain a +1 circumstance bonus on saving 
throws against spells and magical effects.
 OVERWHELMING SPELL FEAT 8
 Trigger
 You start to cast a spell that deals acid, 
cold, electricity, or fire damage. The spell must 
have a maximum of two spellcasting actions.
You add a Somatic Casting action to the casting of the triggering 
spell to make it overcome resistances. Choose one type of 
damage the spell deals: acid, cold, electricity, or fire. That type of 
damage ignores the first 10 points of resistance any target has. 
This applies to any damage the spell deals, including persistent damage and any damage caused by an ongoing effect of the 
spell, such as the wall created by 
wall of fire
.A creature that's immune to that type of damage is still unaffected.
 QUICKENED CASTING FEAT 8
 Frequency
 once per day
Sorcerer
Sorcerer
Necromancy
Sorcerer
Sorcerer
MetamagicSorcerer
Sorcerer
133 Trigger
 You are casting a sorcerer cantrip or a sorcerer spell 
that is at least 2 levels lower than the highest sorcerer spell 
you can cast. The spell must require 2 or more spellcasting 
actions to cast. Choose one of the spell's spellcasting actions. You don't need to 
use that action to finish casting the spell.
14TH LEVEL
 EFFORTLESS CONCENTRATION FEAT 14

Trigger
 Your turn begins.
You immediately gain the effects of a Concentrate on a Spell action 
to extend the duration of one of your active sorcerer spells.
MAGIC SENSE FEAT 14

You can sense the presence of magic auras 
as though you were always using a 1st-level 
detect magic spell. This detects magic in your 
field of vision only. When you Seek, you gain 
the benefits of a 3rd-level 
detect magic spell on things you 
see (in addition to the normal benefits of seeking). You can 
turn this sense offi and on with a free action at the start or 
the end of your turn.
reflect SPELL FEAT 14

Prerequisites 
CounterspellWhen you successfully dispel a spell that affects targeted 
creatures or an area with Counterspell, you can turn that 
spell's effect back on its caster. When reflected, the spell 
affects only the original caster, even if it's an area spell or it 
would normally affect more than one creature. The caster 
can attempt a save or use other defenses against the 
reflected spell as normal.
 SWIFT DISPEL FEAT 14

Prerequisites 
dispel magic
 is in your spell 
repertoire
Trigger
 You affect a creature with a targeted spell.
Requirements
 You have an unexpended spell slot you 
could use to cast dispel magic. You cast 
dispel magic
 as a Somatic reaction, targeting one 
spell effect affecting the creature.
20TH LEVEL
ARCHMAGE'S MIGHT FEAT 20

Prerequisites 
legendary in Arcana if you're 
an arcane caster, legendary in Nature if you're a primal 
caster, legendary in Occultism if you're an occult caster, 
or legendary in Religion if you're a divine caster
You gain a single 10th-level spell slot, which you can 
use to cast 10th-level spells using your sorcerer 
spellcasting. When you select this feat, add two 10th-
level spells of common or uncommon rarity to your 
spell repertoire. These spells must come from the spell 
list determined by your bloodline.
Sorcerer
Arcane
DetectionDivination
Sorcerer
Sorcerer
Sorcerer
Sorcerer
METAMAGIC MASTERY FEAT 20

When you apply a metamagic feat to a spell, you 
don't have to add a Somatic Casting action to the spell's casting.
 WELLSPRING SPELL FEAT 20

Trigger
 You start to cast a spell of 5th level or 
lower that doesn't have a duration. The spell must 
have a maximum of two spellcasting actions.
Frequency
 once per minuteYou add a Somatic Casting action to the casting of the 
triggering spell, and you don't expend the spell's slot when 
you cast it.
Sorcerer
MetamagicSorcerer
134 You are an eternal student of the arcane secrets of the universe. You 
treat magic like a science, cross-referencing the latest texts on practical 
spellcraft with ancient tomes of lost magic to discover and understand 
how magic works. Yet magical theory is vast, and there's no way you can 
study it all. You either specialize in one of the eight schools of magic, 
gaining deeper understanding of the nuances of those spells above all 
others, or favor a broader approach emphasizing the way all magic 
comes together at the expense of depth. WIZARD135 KEY ABILITYIntelligenceHIT POINTS6 plus your Constitution modifier
PROFICIENCIES
PERCEPTION
Trained
SAVING THROWS
Trained in Fortitude
Trained in Reflex
Expert in WillSKILLS
Trained in a number of skills equal to 
 2 plus your Intelligence modifier
WEAPONS
Trained in the club, dagger, heavy 
crossbow, light crossbow, and stafi
ARMORUntrained in all armorSPELLS
Trained in arcane spell rolls and DCs and 
in attack rolls for arcane spells
SIGNATURE SKILLS
Arcana
CraftingADVENTURING AS A WIZARD
Players of wizard characters might approach gameplay in the following ways:

Ł During combat, you likely try to stay out of the fray, carefully judging when to use 
your spells. You save your most powerful spells to incapacitate threatening foes 
and use your renewable cantrips when only weaker foes remain, letting the martial 
characters dispatch them. When your enemies pull out nasty tricks like invisibility 
or flight, you answer them with spells like 
glitterdust
 or earth bind, leveling the 
playing field for your allies. 

Ł During social encounters, you provide a wellspring of knowledge and solve 
arguments using logic.
Ł In exploration mode, you locate magical auras and determine the arcane significance 
of the various esoterica you uncover. When you run across an unusual obstacle to 
further exploration, you probably have a scroll somewhere that will make it easier 
to overcome.

Ł In downtime mode, you learn new spells, train to make yourself more versatile for 
future situations, and research all sorts of information that will come in handy in 
your continuing adventures. You likely craft magic items or scribe scrolls for your 
party as well, which leads you to spend time seeking new and exciting formulas 
in addition to spells. You might even use downtime to forge scholarly connections 
and establish a school or guild of your own.
ROLEPLAYING A WIZARD
Dedicated students of arcane magic, wizards are respected for their intellect, 
preparedness, and depth of knowledge, and feared for the otherworldly powers 
at their command. IF YOU'RE A WIZARD, YOU LIKELY...

Ł Have an unquenchable intellectual curiosity about how everything in the world 
around you works—magic in particular.

Ł Believe fervently in the superiority of your particular school of magic (if you're a 
specialist) or in the fact that true mastery of magic requires knowledge of all schools 
(if you're a universalist).

Ł Use esoteric jargon and technical terms to precisely describe the minutiae of magical 
effects, even though the difierence is probably lost on most other people. Getting it 
right matters to you.
OTHERS PROBABLY...

Ł Think you're an arrogant snob who believes you're smarter or better than others.

Ł Fear what your magic can do to their minds, bodies, and souls and demand that 
you avoid casting spells in polite company, as few can identify whether one of your 
spells is harmless or malevolent until it's too late.

Ł Overestimate your capabilities, blaming you or giving you credit for things like 
the weather or crop yields, even if you don't have magic that can afiect those 
things, and asking you for spells or baubles that can help them get whatever they 
currently desire.
CLASS FEATURES
You gain these abilities as a wizard. Abilities gained at higher levels list the 
requisite levels next to the features' names. ARCANE
 SPELLCASTING
You have the power to cast arcane spells using the Cast a Spell activity, and gain 
access to the Material Casting, Somatic Casting, and Verbal Casting actions (see 
Casting Spells on page 195). At 1st level you can prepare up to two 1st-level spells 
and four cantrips each morning from the spells in your spellbook (see page 137), 
plus one extra cantrip and spell of your chosen school of each level you can cast if 
136 TABLE 3–21: WIZARD ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level
Class Features
1 Ancestry feat, arcane focus, arcane school, arcane 
spellcasting, background, initial proficiencies, spellbook
2 Skill feat, wizard feat
32nd-level spells, general feat, skill increase
4 Skill feat, wizard feat
53rd-level spells, ability boosts, ancestry feat, skill increase
6 Skill feat, wizard feat
74th-level spells, general feat, skill increase
8 Skill feat, wizard feat
95th-level spells, ancestry feat, skill increase
10 Ability boosts, skill feat, wizard feat
116th-level spells, general feat, skill increase
12 Expert spellcaster, skill feat
137th-level spells, ancestry feat, skill increase
14 Skill feat, wizard feat
158th-level spells, ability boosts, general feat, skill increase
16 Master spellcaster, skill feat
179th-level spells, ancestry feat, skill increase
18 Skill feat, wizard feat
19 Legendary spellcaster, general feat, skill increase
20 Ability boosts, skill feat, wizard FEATS
AMPLE SPELLBOOKYou can choose whichever spells you like, but this list covers a 
good selection of starter spells for a 1st-level wizard.
Cantrips: Acid splash, detect magic, electric arc, light, mage 
hand, message, prestidigitation, ray of frost, shield, study aura
.1st Level:
 Ant haul, burning hands, color spray, fear, grease, 
mage armor, magic missile, ray of enfeeblement,
 plus one spell of your school if you're a specialist wizard.
you are a specialist wizard. Prepared spells remain available 
to you until you cast them or until you prepare your spells 
again. The number of spells you can prepare are called your 
spell slots. As you increase in level as a wizard, your number of spell 
slots and the highest level of spells you can cast from spell 
slots increase, as shown on the Wizard Spells per Day table 
on page 137.Some of your spells require you to attempt a spell roll to see 
how effective they are, or have your enemies roll against your 
spell DC. Since your key ability is Intelligence, your spell rolls 
and spell DCs use your Intelligence modifier. See page 291 
for details on calculating your spell rolls and spell DCs. Heightening SpellsWhen you get spell slots of 2nd level and higher, you 
can prepare lower-level spells in those slots to strengthen 
them (see page 192). This increases the spell's level to 
match the heightened spell slot. Many spells have specific 
improvements when they are heightened to certain levels. Cantrips
A cantrip is a special type of spell that doesn't use spell 
slots. You can cast a cantrip at will, any number of times 
per day. A cantrip is always automatically heightened to 
the highest level of spell you can cast as a wizard. For 
example, as a 1st-level wizard, the highest level of spell 
you can cast is 1st, so your cantrips are 1st-level spells. As 
a 5th-level wizard, the highest level of spell you can cast is 
3rd, so your cantrips are 3rd-level spells. SPELLBOOK
You start with a spellbook worth 10 sp or less (as detailed 
on page 187), which you receive for free. The spellbook 
contains your choice of 10 arcane cantrips and eight 1st-level arcane spells. You choose these from the common 
spells on the arcane spell list from this book (see page 199) 
or from other arcane spells you gain access to. Each time you gain a level, you automatically add two 
more arcane spells to your spellbook. These can be of any 
level of spell you can cast. You can also use the Arcana skill 
to add other spells that you find, as described on page 146.If you're creating a higher-level character, it's usually 
easiest to assume you always picked new spells of the 
highest level possible. At an odd-numbered level, this 
means that in addition to your total of 10 cantrips, your 
spellbook holds two spells of your highest level and four 
spells of all lower levels. At an even-numbered level, it 
means you'd have 10 cantrips and four spells of every level. ARCANE
 SCHOOL
If you want to be a specialist wizard, choose one school 
of magic in which to specialize. You gain one additional 
spell slot for each spell level you can cast, but you may use 
these spell slots to prepare only spells from your arcane 
school. You can also prepare one additional cantrip each 
day, which must be from your specialized school. You gain 
Spell Points and a special power based on your school (see 
Arcane Schools on page 137) and add another spell from 
your chosen school to your spellbook. ARCANE
 FOCUSYou can place some of your magical power into an item called 
an arcane focus. Each day when you prepare your spells, you 
can designate a single item you own as your arcane focus. 
This is typically an item associated with spellcasting, such as 
a wand, ring, or staff, but you are free to designate a weapon 
or other item. You gain the Drain Arcane Focus free action.
 DRAIN ARCANE FOCUS 
Frequency
 once per day
Trigger
 Your turn begins.
You expend the magical power stored in your arcane focus. This 
gives you the ability to cast one spell you prepared today and 
previously cast, without spending a spell slot. You must still 
complete the required spellcasting actions and meet the spell's 
other requirements.
Arcane
Wizard
137 TABLE 3–22: WIZARD SPELLS PER DAY
Your
Spell Level
Level
1st2nd3rd
4th5th6th7th8th9th12————————23————————332———————433———————5332——————6333——————73332—————83333—————933332————1033333————11333332———12333333———133333332——143333333——1533333332—1633333333—17333333332183333333331933333333320333333333* If you're a specialist wizard, you can prepare one extra spell of 
your chosen school at each spell level you can cast. 
SKILL FEATS 2ND
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill 
feat. Skill feats can be found in Chapter 5 and have the skill 
trait. You must be trained or better in the corresponding 
skill to select a skill feat. WIZARD FEATS 2ND
At 2nd level, you gain a wizard class feat (see page 139). 
You gain another at 4th, 6th, 8th, 10th, 14th, 18th, and 
20th levels. GENERAL FEATS 2ND
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a 
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.SKILL
 INCREASES 3RD
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a 
skill increase. You can use this increase to either become 
trained in one skill you're untrained in, or become an expert in one skill in which you're already trained. If you are at least 7th level, you can use this increase 
to become a master in a signature skill in which you're 
already an expert. If you are at least 15th level, you 
can use this increase to become legendary in a signature 
skill in which you're already a master.
ABILITY BOOSTS 5TH
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four 
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to 
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability 
score increases it by 1 if it's already 18 or above, or by 2 if 
it starts out below 18.ANCESTRY FEATS 5TH
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain 
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter. 
The list of ancestry feats available to you can be found in 
your ancestry's entry in Chapter 2.
EXPERT SPELLCASTER 12TH
Your proficiency rank for spell rolls, spell DCs, and attack 
rolls for arcane spells increases to expert. MASTER
 SPELLCASTER
 16TH
Your proficiency rank for spell rolls, spell DCs, and attack 
rolls for arcane spells increases to master.
LEGENDARY SPELLCASTER 19TH
Your proficiency rank for spell rolls, spell DCs, and attack 
rolls for arcane spells increases to legendary.
ARCANE SCHOOLS
If you choose to specialize in an arcane school, you gain an 
extra spell slot for each level of spell you can cast. You can 
prepare only spells of your chosen arcane school in these 
extra slots. In addition, you can prepare an extra cantrip 
of your chosen school. You also add another arcane spell 
of your chosen school to your spellbook. You learn a school power, a special type of spell taught 
to students of your arcane school. You gain a pool of Spell 
Points you can spend to cast school powers. You can cast 
a school power only by spending Spell Points, not by using 
spell slots. Like a cantrip, your school power is automatically 
heightened to the highest level of spell you can cast. 
Your maximum number of Spell Points is equal to your 
key ability modifier (minimum 0). You regain all your Spell 
Points when you prepare your spells. Some feats let you 
learn more school power; such feats typically increase your 
pool of Spell Points. ABJURATION
As an abjurer, you master the art of protection and 
warding, strengthening defenses, preventing attacks, and 
even turning magic against itself. You understand that an 
ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. You add 
one 1st-level abjuration spell (such as feather fall) to your 
spellbook. You learn the 
protective ward school power (see 
page 248), which you can cast at a cost of 1 Spell Point. CONJURATION
As a conjurer, you focus on summoning and calling 
creatures and objects from places beyond the pale as well 
as using magic to transport yourself and others to distant 
locations. You understand that the true key to victory is 
strength in numbers. You add one 1st-level conjuration 
spell (such as summon monster) to your spellbook. 138 You
 learn the 
augment summoning
 school power (see page 
206), which you can cast at a cost of 1 Spell Point. DIVINATION
As a diviner, you master remote viewing and prescience, 
gaining key information that can transform investigations, 
battle strategies, and research. You understand that 
knowledge is power. You add one 1st-level divination 
spell (such as true strike) to your spellbook. You learn the 
diviner's sight
 school power (see page 217), which you can 
cast at a cost of 1 Spell Point. ENCHANTMENT
As an enchanter, you use magic to manipulate the minds 
of your victims. You might use your abilities to subtly 
influence others or seize total control over them. You add 
one 1st-level enchantment spell (such as charm) to your 
spellbook. You learn the 
charming words school 
power (see page 210), which you can cast at a cost 
of 1 Spell Point. EVOCATION
As an evoker, you revel in the raw power of magic, using it 
to create and destroy with ease. You can call forth elements, 
forces, and energy to devastate your foes or to assist you in 
other ways. You understand that the direct approach is the 
most elegant. You add one 1st-level evocation spell (such 
as shocking grasp) to your spellbook. You learn the 
force 
bolt school power (see page 225), which you can cast at a 
cost of 1 Spell Point. ILLU
SION
As an illusionist, you use magic to create confounding 
images, figments, and phantasms to baffle your enemies. 
You understand that perception is reality. You add one 
1st-level illusion spell (such as illusory object) to your 
spellbook. You learn the 
warped terrain school power (see 
page 270), which you can cast at a cost of 1 Spell Point. NECROMANCY
As a necromancer, you call upon the powers of life and 
death to use against your enemies. While your school of 
magic is often vilified as solely for those who raise the 
undead, you understand that control over life also means 
control over healing. You add one 1st-level necromancy 
spell (such as grim tendrils) to your spellbook. You learn 
the call of the grave school power (see page 208), which 
you can cast at a cost of 1 Spell Point. TRAN
SMUTATION
As a transmuter, you alter the physical properties of things, 
transforming objects, creatures, the natural world, and even yourself, at your whim. You understand that change 
is inevitable. You add one 1st-level transmutation spell 
(such as magic weapon) to your spellbook. You learn the 
physical boost school power (see page 245), which you can cast at a cost of 1 Spell Point. 
UNIVERSALIST WIZARDS
You can choose not to specialize in an arcane school and 
to instead become a universalist wizard. If you do, you 
can use Drain Arcane Focus once each day per each spell 
level you can cast, instead of only once per day. You also 
gain an extra wizard class feat.139 KEY TERMYou'll see the following key term in many 
wizard abilities. 
Metamagic: Feats with the metamagic 
trait allow you to tweak the properties 
of your spells. These feats are triggered 
when you begin casting a spell, and 
typically require you to spend an additional 
spellcasting action to alter the spell's 
effects. You can't use metamagic feats if 
adding an action to the spell would make 
the spell require more actions than you 
have remaining on your turn. Because most 
metamagic feats have the same trigger, you 
usually can't use more than one metamagic 
feat per spell.
WIZARD FEATS
If you need to look up a wizard feat by 
name instead of by level, use this table.
Feat
Level
Archmage's Might
20 Cantrip Expansion4 Conceal Spell4 Counterspell1 Dimensional Steps8 Dread Aura
8 Efiortless Concentration
14 Elemental Tempest
8 Empowering Focus
4 Energy Absorption8 Eschew Materials
1 Focus Conservation
8 Hand of the Apprentice
1 Invisibility Cloak8 Life Drain8 Magic Sense14 Magical Striker4 Makeshift Wand
8 Metamagic Mastery20 Overwhelming Energy
14 Quick Preparation
4 Quickened Casting8 Reach Spell
1 reflect Spell
14 Shifting Form
8 Spell Combination
20 Spell Penetration
8STeady Spellcasting4 Superior Focus
14 Universal Versatility
8 Vigilant Eye
8 Widen Spell1 WIZARD FEATS
At every level you gain a wizard feat, you can select one of the following feats. 
You must satisfy any prerequisites before taking the feat.
1ST LEVEL
 COUNTERSPELL FEAT 1
 Trigger
 A creature casts a spell that you have prepared. 
You expend a prepared spell to counter the triggering creature's casting of 
that same spell. You lose your spell slot as if you had cast the triggering 
spell. You then attempt to dispel the triggering spell (see Dispelling on page 197).
ESCHEW MATERIALS FEAT 1
 When casting a spell that requires a material component, you can replace 
any Material Casting actions with Somatic Casting actions. This doesn't remove the need 
for any expensive materials listed in the spell's cost entry.
FAMILIAR FEAT 1
 An animal serves you and assists your spellcasting. You gain a familiar 
(rules for familiars are found on page 287).
 HAND OF THE APPRENTICE FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 universalist wizard
You gain the 
hand of the apprentice
 universalist power (see page 228). You gain a pool of 
Spell Points you can spend to cast universalist powers. You can cast a universalist power 
that you have only by spending Spell Points, not by using spell slots. Like a cantrip, your 
universalist power is automatically heightened to the highest level of spell you can cast. 
Your maximum number of Spell Points is equal to your key ability modifier (minimum 
0). You regain all your Spell Points when you prepare your spells. Some feats let you learn 
more universalist powers, and such feats typically increase your pool of Spell Points.
 REACH SPELL FEAT 1
 Trigger
 You start to cast a spell that has a range. The spell must have a 
maximum of 2 spellcasting actions. You add a Somatic Casting action to the casting of the triggering spell to increase its 
range by 30 feet. If the spell normally has a range of touch, you instead extend its range 
to 30 feet, and if the touch spell normally requires an attack roll or a touch attack roll, it 
now requires a ranged attack roll or a ranged touch attack roll, as appropriate.
 WIDEN SPELL FEAT 1
 Trigger
 You start to cast a spell that has an area of a burst, cone, or line, 
and that does not have a duration. The spell must have a maximum of 
2 spellcasting actions. You add a Somatic Casting action to the casting of the triggering spell and increase the 
area of that spell. You add 5 feet to the radius of a burst that normally has a radius of at 
least 10 feet. You add 5 feet to the length of a cone or line that is normally 15 feet long 
or smaller, and add 10 feet to the length of a larger cone or line.
4TH LEVEL
CANTRIP EXPANSION FEAT 4
 You can prepare two additional cantrips each day.
  CONCEAL SPELL FEAT 4
 Trigger
 You start to cast a spell that has a maximum of 2 spellcasting 
actions. Abjuration
Arcane
Wizard
Wizard
Wizard
Wizard
MetamagicWizard
MetamagicWizard
Wizard
Wizard
MetamagicWizard
140 You add a Somatic Casting action to the casting of the triggering 
spell and attempt a Stealth check against one or more observers' 
Perception DCs. If you beat an observer's Perception DC, that 
observer doesn't notice you're casting a spell; if the spell has a 
Verbal Casting action, you must also roll a Deception check against 
the observer's Perception DC, or the observer notices the spell. 
This hides only the spell's spellcasting actions, not its effects, so an 
observer might still see a ray streak out from you or see you vanish.
EMPOWERING FOCUS FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 You must have an arcane school.
Frequency
 once per day
When you Drain your Arcane Focus to cast a spell of your arcane 
school, you gain a +2 circumstance bonus to the spell roll or spell 
DC for that spell.
ENHANCED FAMILIAR FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 familiarYou infuse your familiar with additional magical energy. You can 
select four familiar or master options each day, instead of two.
  MAGICAL STRIKER FEAT 4
 Trigger 
You finish casting a non-cantrip spell on 
your turn.
You siphon residual spell energy into one weapon you're wielding. 
If the weapon is nonmagical, it becomes a 
+1 magic weapon, and one that's already a 
magic weapon
 increases its bonus by 1 (from 
a +1 magic weapon
 to a 
+2 magic weapon, and so on). This benefit 
applies only to the next Strike you perform on your turn, and is 
wasted if you don't Strike by the end of your turn. You can gain 
the benefit of Magical Striker only once per turn. QUICK PREPARATION FEAT 4
 You can spend 10 minutes to empty one of your 
prepared spell slots and prepare a different spell from your spellbook 
in its place. If you are interrupted during such a swap, the original 
spell remains prepared and can still be cast. You can try again to 
swap out the spell later, but you must start the process over again.
STEADY SPELLCASTING FEAT 4
 Your spells are disrupted by reactions (see page 297) 
only if you take damage equal to or greater than double your level.
8TH LEVEL
DIMENSIONAL STEPS FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 conjuration arcane school
You gain the 
dimensional steps school power (see page 215), 
which you can cast at a cost of 1 Spell Point. Increase your Spell 
Point pool by 2.
DREAD AURA FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 enchantment arcane school
You gain the 
dread aura
 school power (see page 219), which you 
can cast at a cost of 2 Spell Points. Increase your Spell Point 
pool by 2.
Wizard
Wizard
Wizard
Wizard
Wizard
Wizard
Wizard
Wizard
ELEMENTAL TEMPEST FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 evocation arcane school
You gain the 
elemental tempest school power (see page 221), 
which you can cast at a cost of 2 Spell Points. Increase your Spell 
Point pool by 2.
ENERGY ABSORPTION FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 abjuration arcane school
You gain the 
energy absorption
 school power (see page 221), 
which you can cast at a cost of 2 Spell Points. Increase your Spell 
Point pool by 2.
 FOCUS CONSERVATION FEAT 8
 Trigger
 You cast a spell using Drain Arcane Focus 
that has a maximum of 2 spellcasting actions. 
Add a Somatic Casting action to the casting. You gain an extra 
use of Drain Arcane Focus that you can use to cast a spell with 
a level at least 2 levels lower than the triggering spell. You must 
use this extra use of Drain Arcane Focus before the end of your 
next turn, or you lose it.
INVISIBILITY CLOAK FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 illusion arcane school
You gain the 
invisibility cloak school power (see page 233), which 
you can cast at a cost of 2 Spell Points. Increase your Spell Point 
pool by 2.
LIFE DRAIN FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 necromancy arcane school
You gain the 
life siphon school power (see page 234), which you 
can cast at a cost of 2 Spell Points. Increase your Spell Point 
pool by 2.
 QUICKENED CASTING FEAT 8
 Frequency
 once per day
Trigger
 You are casting a wizard cantrip or a wizard spell at least 
2 levels lower than the highest wizard spell you can cast. The 
spell must require 2 or more spellcasting actions to cast.
Choose one of the spell's spellcasting actions. You don't need to 
use that action to finish casting the spell.
SHIFTING FORM FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 transmutation arcane school
You gain the 
shifting form school power (see page 255), which 
you can cast at a cost of 2 Spell Points. Increase your Spell Point 
pool by 2.
SPELL PENETRATION FEAT 8
 You've studied ways of overcoming the innate 
resistance to spells that many powerful creatures have. Against 
your spells, a creature that has a conditional bonus to saving 
throws against magic reduces that bonus by 1.
MAKESHIFT WAND FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 expert in Crafting
During your daily preparations, you can create a makeshift 
Wizard
Wizard
MetamagicWizard
Wizard
Wizard
Wizard
Wizard
Wizard
Wizard
141wand containing a spell from your spellbook. This wand follows 
the normal wand rules, except it has only 3 charges, its spell 
level must be 2 or more levels lower than your highest-level 
spell, and its item level can be no higher than your level. You 
can create only one temporary wand per day, and any wand 
you create becomes nonmagical the next time you prepare. A 
temporary wand has no value and can't be used by anyone 
other than you.
VIGILANT EYE FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 divination arcane school
You gain the 
vigilant eye
 school power (see page 268), which 
you can cast at a cost of 2 Spell Points. Increase your Spell Point 
pool by 2.
UNIVERSAL VERSATILITY FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 universalist wizard, Hand of the 
Apprentice
During your daily preparations, choose one of the eight school 
powers gained by 1st-level specialist wizards. You can use that 
school power until the next time you prepare. You can spend 
1 minute concentrating and 2 Spell Points to change which 
power you have available that day. Increase your Spell Point 
pool by 2.
14TH LEVEL
 EFFORTLESS CONCENTRATION FEAT 14

Trigger
 Your turn begins.
You immediately gain the effects of a Concentrate on a Spell 
action to extend the duration of one of your active wizard spells.
MAGIC SENSE FEAT 14

You can sense the presence of magic auras as 
though you were always using a 1st-level 
detect magic spell. This detects magic in your field of 
vision only. When you Seek, you gain the benefits 
of a 3rd-level 
detect magic
 spell on things you see (in addition to 
the normal benefits of seeking). You can turn this sense ofi and 
on with a free action at the start or the end of your turn.
 OVERWHELMING ENERGY FEAT 14

Trigger
 You start to cast a spell that has a maximum 
of 2 spellcasting actions. You add a Somatic Casting action to the casting of the triggering 
spell. The spell treats any resistance to acid, cold, electricity, fire, 
or sonic the targets have as if it were 10 lower.
reflect SPELL FEAT 14

Prerequisites
 CounterspellWhen you successfully dispel a spell that afiects targeted 
creatures or an area with Counterspell, you can turn that spell's 
efiect back on its caster. When reflected, the spell afiects only 
the original caster, even if it's an area spell or it would normally 
afiect more than one creature. The caster can attempt to save 
or use other defenses against the reflected spell as normal.
Wizard
Wizard
Wizard
Arcane
DetectionDivination
Wizard
MetamagicWizard
Wizard
SUPERIOR FOCUS FEAT 14

You can use Drain Arcane Bond one additional time 
per day, but you can't use this additional use to cast a spell of 
your highest or second-highest spell level.
20TH LEVEL
ARCHMAGE'S MIGHT FEAT 20

Prerequisites
 legendary in Arcana
You gain a single 10th-level spell slot, which you can use to cast 
10th-level arcane spells using your wizard spellcasting. When 
you select this feat, add two 10th-level arcane spells of common 
or uncommon rarity to your spellbook.
METAMAGIC MASTERY FEAT 20

When you apply a metamagic feat to a spell, you 
don't have to add a Somatic Casting action to the spell's casting.
SPELL COMBINATION FEAT 20

One slot of each level of spell you can cast, except 
1st level and cantrips, becomes a spell combination slot. When 
you prepare your spells, you can fill a combination slot with a 
combination of two spells. Each spell in the combination must be 
1 or more spell levels below the slot's level and both must target 
only one creature or object or have the option to target only one 
creature or object.
Each spell in the combination must also have the same means 
of determining whether it has an efiect—both spells must either 
require a ranged attack roll, the same type of saving throw, or 
automatically afiect the target.
When you cast a combined spell, it afiects only one target, 
even if the component spells normally afiect more than one 
target. If any spell in the combination has further restrictions 
(such as targeting only humanoids or only living creatures), 
you must abide by all restrictions. Handle the resolution of a 
combined spell as if were a single spell, but apply the effects 
of both component spells. For example, if the spell's target 
successfully saved against a combined spell, it would take the 
"Succeed" efiect of each spell, and if it critically failed it would 
take the "Critical Failure" efiect of both spells.
Wizard
Wizard
Wizard
Wizard
142 SKILL USESThe actions, activities, free actions, and reactions you can 
perform with a given skill are sorted into those you can use 
untrained and those that require you to be at least trained 
in the skill, as shown on Table 4–1: Skills, Key Abilities, 
and Uses. The untrained and trained uses of each skill 
appear in separate sections within the skill's description. 
Anyone can use a skill's untrained uses unless some 
circumstance, condition, or effect bars them from doing 
so. You can use trained uses only if you're at least trained 
in that skill and no circumstance, condition, or effect bars you from that use. Sometimes using a skill in a specific situation might require you to have a higher proficiency rank than what is listed on the table. For instance, even though a high-level barbarian untrained in Arcana could reliably use Arcana to Recall Knowledge regarding the 
breath weapons of the various colors of dragons, the GM might decide that Recalling Knowledge about the deeper theories behind magical energy of a dragon's breath 
weapon might be something beyond the scope of the barbarian's largely utilitarian and anecdotal knowledge 
about how to fight dragons. The GM decides whether a task requires a particular proficiency rank, from trained all the way up to legendary.
As you advance in level, you'll gain a type of general 
feat called a skill feat, which often grants you a new use 
of a skill. Skill feats always have the skill trait. These feats 
appear in Chapter 5. 
KEY ABILITYEach skill is tied to a key ability. This is the ability 
whose modifier you add to checks when using that skill. Skulking about the shadows of the a city at night with Stealth uses your Dexterity modifier, navigating the 
myriad personalities and power-plays of court politics 
with Society uses your Intelligence modifier, and so on. 
The key ability for each skill is listed on Table 4–1 and in 
a parenthesis following the skill's name in the descriptions 
that follow. If the GM deems it appropriate, she may 
have you use a different ability modifier for a skill check or when determining your skill DC. While your ability scores represent your raw talent and potential, skills 
represent your training and experience. Each skill is a broad grouping 
of several different uses, and each is keyed to one of your ability scores. 
In this chapter, you'll learn about skills; their scope; and the actions, 
activities, free actions, and reactions they grant. 
SKILL CHECKS AND SKILL DCS
When you're actively using a skill (usually by engaging in 
one of its uses), you'll often attempt a skill check by rolling 
a d20 and adding your skill modifier. To determine your 
skill modifier, add your ability modifier for that skill's key 
ability, your proficiency modifier for that skill, and any 
other bonuses and penalties that may apply. 
Skill modifier = ability modifier + proficiency modifier + 
circumstance bonus + conditional bonus + item bonus + 
circumstance penalty + conditional penalty + 
item penalty + untyped penaltiesSometimes the DC of the skill check is listed in the skill's 
use itself. Other times, the GM sets the DC of the skill 
check, using the guidelines in Chapter 10: Game Mastering. 
When someone or something is testing your skill, they 
attempt a check against your skill DC, which is 10 plus 
your skill modifier. A skill DC works like any other DC 
to determine the effect of an opposing creature's skill use.
As with other checks, bonuses can increase the result of 
your check and penalties can decrease the result of your 
check. See page 290 in Chapter 9: Playing the Game for 
more information about modifiers, bonuses, and penalties. AIDING
 SKILL
 C
HE
CKSSometimes the GM might allow you to use a skill to help 
another character perform a task more effectively. In some 
situations, you can simply perform one or more of a skill's 
uses to grant a circumstance bonus to another character's 
check for the task they're attempting. Other times, 
aiding an ally's skill check requires more exact timing, 
necessitating the Aid reaction (see page 307 in Chapter 9).
ARMOR AND SKILLS
Some armor imposes a penalty on specific skill checks and 
DCs. If a creature is wearing armor that imparts a skill 
penalty, that penalty is applied to Dexterity- and Strength-
based skill checks and skill DCs, unless the use has the 
attack trait. Check penalties from armor are detailed in 
Chapter 6: Equipment on page 176. 
SKILLS143 TABLE 4–1: SKILLS, KEY ABILITIES, AND USES
SkillKey Ability
Untrained Uses
Trained Uses
Acrobatics: Dexterity
Balance (action)Maneuver in Flight (action)
Escape (action)Grab Edge (reaction)
Maintain Balance (free action)
Squeeze (activity)
Tumble Through (action)
Arcana: Intelligence
Recall Knowledge (action)
Borrow an Arcane Spell (activity)
Identify Magic (activity)
Learn an Arcane Spell (activity)
Read Magic (activity)
Athletics: Strength
Break Grapple (action)
Disarm (action)Break Open (action)
Climb (action)Grapple (action)High Jump (activity)
Long Jump (activity)
Shove (action)
Swim (action)
Trip (action)
Crafting: Intelligence
Repair (activity)
Craft (activity)
Identify Alchemy (activity)
Deception: Charisma
Create a Diversion (action)
Feint (action)
Impersonate (activity)
Lie (activity)
Diplomacy: Charisma
Gather Information (activity)
Make an Impression (activity)
Request (action)
Intimidation: Charisma
Demoralize (action)
Coerce (activity)
Lore: Intelligence
Recall Knowledge (action)
Practice a Trade (activity)
MedicineWisdomAdminister First Aid (action)
Treat Disease (activity)
Treat Poison (action)
Nature: Wisdom
Command an Animal (action) 
Identify Magic (activity)
Handle an Animal (action)
Learn a Primal Spell (activity)
Recall Knowledge (action)
Occultism: Intelligence
Recall Knowledge (action)
Identify Magic (activity)
Learn an Occult Spell (activity)
Read Esoterica (activity)
Performance: Charisma
Perform (action)
Stage a Performance (activity)
Religion: Wisdom
Recall Knowledge (action)
Identify Magic (activity)
Learn a Divine Spell (activity)
Read Scripture (activity)
Society: Intelligence
Recall Knowledge (action)
Create Forgery (activity)
Subsist on the Streets (activity)
Decipher Writing (activity)
Stealth: Dexterity
Conceal an Object (action)
Hide (action)
Sneak (action)
Survival: Wisdom
Sense Direction (activity)
Cover Tracks (action)
Survive in the Wild (activity)
Track (action)
Thievery: Dexterity
Palm an Object (action)Disable a Device (action)
Steal an Object (action)Pick a Lock (action)
144 SECRET CHECKS
In some circumstances, you will not know whether you 
succeed at a skill check. If a skill use has the secret trait, the 
GM rolls the check for you and informs you of the effect 
without revealing the result of the roll or the degree of 
success. The GM rolls secret checks when your knowledge 
about the outcome is imperfect, like when you're 
searching for a hidden creature or object, attempting to 
deceive someone, translating a tricky bit of ancient text, 
or remembering some piece of lore. This way, you as the 
player don't know things that your character wouldn't. 
More information about secret checks can be found in 
Chapter 9 on page 293.DOWNTIME SKILL ACTIVITIES
Some skill uses have the downtime trait. These activities can be used only when you have a lot of time on your 
hands, usually a day or more. If you're not sure whether you have the time to use one, ask your GM. SIGNATURE SKILLS
Your background, class, and some other abilities list 
several skills that you are especially good at; these are 
called your signature skills. Over time, you can increase 
your proficiency rank in these skills to master or legend. 
Conversely, you are typically limited to a maximum 
proficiency rank of expert in non-signature skills. 
SKILL DESCRIPTIONS
Each of the following entries describes one of the skills in 
the game. The title for each entry provides the skill's name, 
followed by that skill's key ability in parentheses. A brief 
description of the skill is followed by a list of the actions, 
activities, free actions, and reactions you can attempt if 
you are untrained in that skill. Those are followed by 
the actions, activities, free actions, and reactions you can 
perform if you are at least trained in that skill. As the uses of a skill aren't comprehensive, there 
may be times when the GM asks you to attempt a skill check 
without using any of the listed actions, activities, free 
actions, or reactions, or times when the GM asks you to 
roll using a different key ability modifier. 
ACROBATICS (DEX)
Acrobatics measures your ability to perform physical feats 
that require balance, coordination, and grace. 
You can perform the following uses of Acrobatics even 
if you are untrained in the skill. BALANCE
You can move across a narrow surface or uneven 
ground by attempting an Acrobatics check against the DC of the 
narrow surface or uneven ground. You start this action while 
in a square that contains a narrow surface, uneven ground, or 
another similar feature. You are always flat-footed while on a 
narrow surface or uneven ground.
Move
Success You move up to your Speed across the narrow 
surface or uneven ground, treating it as diflcult terrain 
(see page 312). 
Critical Success
 You move up to your Speed across the narrow 
surface or uneven ground, treating it as normal terrain.
Failure
 You must stay stationary (wasting the action) or you 
fall. If you fall, your turn ends.
Critical Failure
 You fall, and your turn ends.
 ESCAPE
 When trying to escape from restraints or a creature's Grapple, 
attempt an Acrobatics check. If you're tied up by a creature, the 
escape DC is that creature's Thievery DC. If you're restrained 
by manacles or some other device, the DC is based on the type 
of restraint. Against a Grapple, the escape DC is the Grappling 
creature's Athletics DC.
Success You escape from the restraints or the Grapple, losing 
the grabbed or restrained condition.
Critical Success Per a success, and you can move up to 5 feet. 
If you move, this action gains the move trait.
Critical Failure
 You don't escape, and you take a –2 
circumstance penalty to Acrobatics checks to Escape until 
the end of your current turn.
 GRAB EDGE
Trigger
 You fall from or past an edge or handhold.
Requirements 
Your hands are not tied behind your back or 
otherwise restrained.
When you fall ofi an edge or past an edge or some other form 
of handhold, you can use this reaction in an attempt to grab it, 
potentially stopping your fall. If you grab on, you can then Climb 
up using Athletics.
Success If you have at least one hand free, you grab on to 
the edge or the handhold, stopping your fall. You still take 
damage from the distance fallen so far, but you treat the fall 
as though you had fallen 20 feet fewer. If you have no hands 
free, you continue to fall as if you had failed the check. 
Critical Success
 You grab on to the edge or the handhold, 
whether or not you have a hand free, typically by using a 
suitable held item to catch yourself (catching a battle axe 
on a ledge, for example). You still take damage from the 
distance fallen so far, but you treat the fall as though you 
had fallen 30 feet fewer.
Critical Failure
 You continue to fall, and if you've fallen 20 feet 
or more before you use this reaction, you take 10 bludgeoning 
damage from the impact for every 20 feet fallen.
 MAINTAIN BALANCE
Trigger
 You take damage while standing on a narrow surface 
or uneven ground or otherwise have your balanced tested, as 
determined by the GM. 
You try to keep your balance to avoid falling.
Success You keep your balance.
Critical Success You keep your balance and don't need to 
attempt further checks to Maintain Balance this round.
Failure
 You fall.
Manipulate
145 
SQUEEZE
You attempt to squeeze through a small space by 
contorting your body to ffit through. 
Success You squeeze through the tight space in 1 minute per 
5 feet of squeezing.
Critical Success You squeeze through the tight space in 
1 minute per 10 feet of squeezing.
Critical Failure
 You become stuck in the tight space. While 
you're stuck, you can spend 1 minute attempting another 
Acrobatics check at the same DC. Any result other than a 
critical failure causes you to become unstuck.
 TUMBLE THROUGH
You Stride up to your Speed. During this movement, 
you can try to move through the space of one enemy. Attempt an 
Acrobatics check against the enemy's Reflex DC as soon as you 
try to enter its space. You can Tumble Through using Climb, Fly, 
Swim, or another movement type in the appropriate environment.
Success You move through the enemy's space, treating the 
squares in its space as diflcult terrain. If you don't have 
enough Speed to move all the way through its space, you 
get the same efiect as on a failure.
Failure 
Your movement ends, and you trigger reactions (such 
as Attacks of Opportunity) as if you had moved out of 
the square you started in.
ACROBATICS 
TRAINED ACTION
You can perform the following use of Acrobatics only if 
you are at least trained in this skill. 
MANEUVER IN FLIGHT
If you have a fiy Speed (see page 310) and you 
must conduct a diflcult maneuver while fiying, attempt an 
Acrobatics check. 
Success You succeed at the maneuver.
Critical Success You succeed at the maneuver and gain a 
+2 circumstance bonus to your checks to Maneuver in 
Flight until the end of your next turn.
Failure
 Your maneuver fails, and the GM chooses whether 
you simply can't move or some other detrimental efiect 
happens. This consequence should be appropriate for the 
maneuver you attempted (for instance, being blown ofi 
course if you were trying to fiy against a strong wind).
ARCANA (INT)
This skill measures how much you know about alchemy, 
arcane spells, and the most common magic items. 
Further, it determines how much information you have 
on theories about alchemy and arcane energies as well 
as lore about the creatures associated with them. If you're trained in Arcana, regardless of whether or not 
you're an alchemist or a spellcaster, you're versed in how 
to identify alchemical and magic items, even those you 
normally would not be able to use. You can use Arcana in the following way, even if you 
are untrained in the skill. Move
Move
Move
 RECALL KNOWLEDGE
You attempt an Arcana check to try to remember 
a bit of knowledge regarding alchemical reactions, 
arcane theories, magic traditions, or creatures of alchemical or 
arcane signifficance. The GM determines the DCs for such checks.
Success You recall the knowledge accurately.
Critical Failure
 You recall incorrect information.
ARCANA 
TRAINED ACTIVITIES
You can perform the following uses of Arcana only if you 
are at least trained in this skill. 
BORROW AN ARCANE SPELL
If you're an arcane spellcaster who prepares spells, 
during your daily preparations, you can attempt to prepare a 
spell from someone else's spellbook. The GM sets the DC for the 
check (see Table 4–2 on page 146).
Success You prepare the borrowed spell as part of your 
normal spell preparation.
Failure 
You fail to prepare the spell, but the spell slot remains 
available for you to prepare a different spell. You can't try 
to prepare this spell until the next time you prepare spells.
IDENTIFY MAGIC
Once you discover that an item, location, or 
ongoing efiect is magical, you can spend an hour 
to attempt to identify the particulars of its magic. If your attempt 
is interrupted, you must start over. The GM sets the DC for your 
check (see Table 4–2 on page 146). Cursed or esoteric subjects 
usually have higher DCs or might even be impossible to identify 
using Arcana alone. Heightening a spell doesn't increase the DC.
Success For an item or location, you get a sense of what it 
does and learn any means of activating it. For an ongoing 
efiect, you learn the efiect's name and what it does. You 
can't try again in hopes of getting a critical success.
Critical Success You learn all the attributes of the magic, 
including whether it is cursed. Failure
 You fail to identify the magic and can't try again for 1 day.
Critical Failure
 You misidentify the magic as something else of 
the GM's choice.
Concentrate
Secret
Concentrate
Concentrate
Secret
FALLING
When you jump or fall more than 5 feet, upon landing you 
take falling damage, which is bludgeoning damage equal to half the distance you fell. If you take any damage from a fall, 
you're knocked prone when you land.
If you fall into water, snow, or another soft substance, 
calculate the damage from the fall as though it were 20 feet 
shorter. The efiective reduction can't be greater than the 
depth of the water (so when falling into water that is only 10 
feet deep, you treat the fall as 10 feet shorter). You can Grab 
an Edge as a reaction (see the Acrobatics skill) to reduce 
the damage from some falls. More detailed rules for falling 
damage appear on page 310.146 TABLE 4–2: IDENTIFYING OR LEARNING A SPELL
Spell Level
Price*
Typical DC*
1st or cantrip20 sp132nd60 sp163rd
160 sp194th360 sp225th700 sp256th1,400 sp
287th3,030 sp318th6,500 sp349th15,000 sp3710th*
70,000 sp40* Rare spells of 9th level or lower typically have a Price and DC 
that's 1
 level higher. 
LEARN AN ARCANE SPELL
If you are an arcane spellcaster, you can gain 
access to a new arcane spell from someone who knows that spell 
or from magical writing like a spellbook or scroll.
To learn the spell, you must do the following.

Ł Spend 1 hour per level of the spell, during which you must 
remain in conversation with the person who knows the spell 
or have the magical writing in your possession.

Ł Have an amount of magical materials with a value indicated in 
Table 4–2 above.

Ł Attempt an Arcana check with a DC determined by the GM 
(see Table 4–2 above).
Success You expend the materials and learn the spell. If you have 
a spellbook, the spell is added to your spellbook; if you prepare 
spells from a list, it's added to your list; if you have a spell 
repertoire, you can select it when you add or swap spells.
Critical Success Per a success, but you expend only half the 
cost in materials.
Failure
 You fail to learn the spell but can try again after you 
gain a level. The materials aren't expended.
Critical Failure
 Per a failure, plus you waste half the materials.
READ MAGIC
You can read and understand magic writing as 
long as it is in a language you can normally read. 
This usually takes about 1 minute per page of text, but it could 
take longer in the case of ancient or obscure writings, or in other 
situations at the GM's discretion. To read and understand the 
nuances of particularly archaic, esoteric, or obscure texts, the 
GM may require you to attempt an Arcana check to see if you 
understand the true meaning of the magic writing. The GM might have you attempt one check for the entire text or one check for 
each section of a larger text.
Success You understand the true meaning of the text.
Critical Failure
 You misread the text.
ATHLETICS (STR)
Training in Athletics is the result of conditioning that 
allows you to perform deeds of physical prowess. 
You can perform the following uses of Athletics even if 
you are untrained in the skill. Concentrate
Concentrate
Secret
 BREAK GRAPPLE
You attempt to break an opponent's Grapple with an Athletics 
check against that creature's Athletics DC.
Success You break free from your opponent's Grapple and 
remove the grabbed or restrained conditions you gained 
from it.
Critical Success You remove the grabbed or restrained 
condition you gained from the opponent's Grapple, and you 
can either knock the opponent prone or grab the opponent 
as if you succeeded at a Grapple against that creature. If 
you grab the opponent, this action gains the attack trait.
Critical Failure
 If you were grabbed, you become restrained. 
If you're already restrained, you can't attempt to Break a 
Grapple again until the start of your next turn.
 BREAK OPEN
Using your body, a lever, or some other tool, you 
attempt to forcefully open a door, window, or container; lift a heavy 
gate; or break open some kind of bonds restraining your mobility. 
With a high enough result, you can even smash through walls.
Success You break the door, window, or container open, and 
the door, window, or container gains the broken condition.
Critical Success
 You open the door, window, or container but 
can avoid damaging it in the process.
Critical Failure
 Your attempt jams the door, window, or 
container shut, imposing a –2 circumstance penalty on all 
future attempts to open it.
 CLIMBRequirements
 You have both hands free.
You move up, down, or across an incline. Unless the climb is 
particularly easy, you must attempt an Athletics check. The DC is 
determined by the GM based on the nature of the incline and any 
environmental circumstances. If you fall, the Grab Edge use of 
Acrobatics might allow you to catch yourself. You are flat-footed 
while climbing unless you have a climb Speed.
Success You move 5 feet up, across, or safely down the incline. 
If your Speed is 40 feet or greater, you move 10 feet instead.
Critical Success You move half your Speed up, across, or 
safely down the incline.
Critical Failure
 You fall (see page 310). If you began the climb 
on stable ground, you fall and land prone.
 GRAPPLE
 Requirements
 You have at least one free hand. 
Your target cannot be more than two sizes larger than you.
You attempt to grab an opponent. Grappling requires you to roll 
an Athletics check against the opponent's Fortitude DC.
Success Your opponent is grabbed until the end of your next 
turn unless you move or your opponent Escapes using 
Acrobatics or Breaks the Grapple with Athletics.
Critical Success Your opponent is restrained until the end of 
your next turn unless you move or your opponent gets loose.
Failure
 You fail to grab your opponent. If you already had the 
opponent grabbed or restrained by way of a Grapple, those 
conditions on that creature end.
Attack
Move
Attack
147 
Critical Failure
 If you already had the opponent grabbed or 
restrained, she gets free. Your target can grab you as if she 
succeeded at the Grapple action against you or force you to 
fall and land prone.
 HIGH JUMP
You Stride, and if you move at least 10 feet, roll a DC 30 Athletics 
check in an attempt to Leap vertically. This DC might be increased 
or decreased due to the situation, as determined by the GM.
Success You Leap, increasing the vertical distance to 5 feet.
Critical Success
 You Leap, increasing your vertical distance 
to 8 feet or increasing your vertical distance to 5 feet and 
your horizontal distance to 10 feet.
Failure
 You Leap the maximum height allowed by the Leap 
action. Critical Failure
 Instead of Leaping, you fall prone in your space.
 LONG JUMP
You Stride, and if you move at least 10 feet, roll an Athletics check 
in an attempt to Leap horizontally in the same direction. The DC 
of the check is equal to 5 plus the total distance in feet you're 
attempting to move during your Leap (so Leaping 20 feet would 
require a DC 25 check). You can't Leap farther than your Speed. 
This DC might be increased or decreased due to the situation, as 
determined by the GM.
Success You Leap, increasing the distance you move 
horizontally to the desired distance.
Failure
 You Leap the maximum distance allowed by the Leap 
action. 
Critical Failure
 You Leap the maximum distance allowed by 
the Leap action, then fall prone.
 SHOVE
Requirements
 You have at least one hand free. The 
target can't be more than two sizes larger than you.
You push an opponent away from you. Attempt an Athletics 
check against your opponent's Fortitude DC.
Success You push your opponent back 5 feet. You can move 
5 feet in the same direction as your opponent. If you do, 
this action gains the move trait.
Critical Success You push your opponent up to 10 feet back. 
You can move 10 feet in the same direction as your 
opponent. If you do, this action gains the move trait.
Critical Failure
 You lose your balance, fall, and land prone.
 SWIM
 You use your arms and legs to swim through 
water. In most calm water, you succeed at the action without 
needing to attempt a check. If you must breathe air and you're 
submerged in water, you must hold your breath each round. If 
you fail to hold your breath, you begin to drown (as described 
on page 315). If the water you are swimming in is turbulent or 
otherwise dangerous, you might have to attempt an Athletics 
check to Swim.
If you end your turn in the water and haven't succeeded at a 
Swim action that turn, you sink down 10 feet or fioat up 10 feet, 
Attack
Move
as determined by the GM. However, if your last action on your 
turn was to enter the water, you don't sink or fioat that turn.
Success You move 5 feet horizontally through the water. If 
your Speed is 15 feet or greater, you move 10 feet instead, 
and if your Speed is 60 feet or greater, you move 15 feet 
instead. You can swim upward or downward, but doing so 
counts as moving through diflcult terrain.
Critical Success Per a success, but you can move an additional 
5 feet. Critical Failure
 You make no progress, and this action counts 
as 2 actions holding your breath.
 TRIP
 Requirements
 You have at least one hand free. 
Your target can't be more than two sizes larger than you.
You try to knock an opponent to the ground. Attempt an Athletics 
check against the target's Reflex DC. 
Success The target falls prone.
Critical Success
 The target falls prone and takes 
1d6 bludgeoning damage. Critical Failure
 You lose your balance and fall, and land prone.
ATHLETICS
 TRAINED ACTION
You can perform the following use of Athletics only if you 
are at least trained in this skill. DISARMRequirements
 You have at least one hand free. The 
target can't be more than two sizes larger than you.
You try to knock something out of an opponent's grasp. A 
Disarm attack requires you to roll an Athletics check against the 
opponent's Reflex DC.
Success You weaken your opponent's grasp on the item. Until 
the start of that creature's turn, attempts to Disarm the 
opponent of that item get a +2 circumstance bonus.
  Critical Success You knock the item out of the opponent's 
grasp. It falls to the ground in the opponent's space.
Critical Failure
 You lose your balance and become flat-footed 
until the start of your next turn.
CRAFTING (INT)
You can use this skill to create and repair items. 
You can attempt the following activity even if you are 
untrained in Crafting. 
REPAIR
Requirements
 You must use a repair kit (see page 187).
You spend an hour attempting to ffix a dented or broken item. The 
GM sets the DC, but typically it's more diflcult to Repair a high-
quality or magic item. You can't Repair a destroyed item.
Success You remove 1 Dent from the item. In most cases, 
a dented item becomes fully restored and a broken item 
becomes only dented.
Critical Success You fully restore the item.
Critical Failure
 You dent the item. If the item is magical, this 
Dent can't destroy it.
Attack
Attack
Manipulate
148
level, to a minimum of 1 day. After spending this base number of 
days, you can either expend more materials to complete the item 
immediately or spend more days Crafting, completing the item 
more slowly but at lower cost. The success entry explains this 
mechanic further.
You can Craft items with the consumable trait in batches, 
making up to four of the same item simultaneously. This requires 
you to include the raw materials for all the items in the batch at 
the start, and you must complete the batch all at once.
After you expend the required amount of raw materials and 
base downtime, attempt a Crafting check. If you fail or critically 
fail, you can try to Craft the item again, but you have to start over.
Success Your attempt to create the item is successful. You 
can pay the remaining half of the item's Price to complete 
it immediately, or spend additional downtime days working 
on it. For each additional day you spend, reduce the value 
of the materials you need to expend to complete the item 
by an amount based on your level and profficiency rank 
(see Table
 4–3). After any of these downtime days, you can 
complete the item by spending the remaining amount. If 
your downtime days are interrupted, you can return to ffinish 
the item later, continuing right where you left ofi.
Critical Success Per a success, but each day you spend 
working reduces the remaining raw materials cost as 
though your level were 1 higher.
Failure
 You fail to complete the item. You can salvage the raw 
materials you supplied for their full value.
Critical Failure
 You fail to complete the item. You ruin 10% of 
the raw materials you supplied, but can salvage the rest.
IDENTIFY ALCHEMY
Requirements
 You must use alchemist's tools (see 
page 184). You can identify the nature of an alchemical item with 10 minutes 
of testing using alchemist's tools (see page 184 in Chapter 6: 
Equipment). The DC of the check is 10 plus the level of the item. If 
your attempt is interrupted in any way, you must start over.
Success You identify the item and the means of activating it.
Failure
 You fail to identify the item but can try again.
Critical Failure
 You misidentify the item as another item of 
the GM's choice.
DECEPTION (CHA)
You can trick and bamboozle others through disguises, 
lies, and other forms of subterfuge. You can perform the following uses of Deception even 
if you are untrained in the skill. CREATE A DIVERSION
With a gesture, a trick, or some distracting words, you 
can create a diversion that draws creatures' attention
 elsewhere. If 
you use a gesture or trick, this action gains the manipulate trait. If 
you use distracting words, it gains the auditory and lingual traits.
Attempt a single Deception check and compare it to the 
Perception DCs of the creatures whose attention you're attempting 
to divert. Whether you succeed or fail, creatures you attempt 
Concentrate
Secret
Mental
CRAFTING TRAINED ACTIVITIES
You can attempt the following uses of Crafting only if you 
are trained in this skill. CRAFTYou can make an item from raw materials. The GM 
determines the DC to Craft an item, which is based on its level, quality, and rarity, and might be afiected by other 
circumstances. You need the Alchemical Crafting skill feat (page 
162) to create alchemical items, the Magical Crafting skill feat 
(page 168) to create magic items, and the Snare Crafting feat 
(page 171) to create snares.
To Craft an item, you must meet the following requirements:

Ł The item is your level or lower. (An item that doesn't list a level 
is level 0.)

Ł You have the profficiency rank appropriate to the item's quality. 
(See page 190.)
Ł You have the formula for the item.

Ł You have an appropriate set of tools and, in many cases, a 
workshop. For example, you need access to a smithy to forge 
a metal shield.
Ł You must supply raw materials worth at least half the item's 
Price. You always expend at least that amount of raw materials 
when you Craft successfully. If you're in a settlement, you can 
usually spend currency to get an equal amount of raw materials 
you need, except in the case of rarer special materials. 
You need to spend a minimum number of downtime days 
to Craft your item to a basic state of completion. This number 
depends on your level and the level of the item. You need to spend 
4 downtime days for an item of your level. Reduce the number 
of days by 1 for each level by which your level exceeds the item's 
Downtime
Manipulate
TABLE 4–3: CRAFTING PROGRESS PER DAY
Your Level
Trained
ExpertMasterLegendary
11 sp———22 sp———34 sp4 sp——45 sp6 sp——59 sp10 sp——612 sp14 sp——716 sp20 sp20 sp—820 sp28 sp30 sp—925 sp36 sp40 sp—1030 sp45 sp50 sp—1135 sp60 sp75 sp—1240 sp75 sp100 sp—1350 sp100 sp150 sp—1475 sp150 sp250 sp—15100 sp200 sp350 sp350 sp16125 sp250 sp475 sp
500 sp17150 sp300 sp650 sp700 sp18200 sp450 sp900 sp1,000 sp19300 sp600 sp1,200 sp1,500 sp20375 sp750 sp1,500 sp2,000 sp20 (crit.)450 sp900 sp1,750 sp
2,500 sp149 CRAFTING EXAMPLEEzren is a 5th-level wizard and an expert in Crafting. He has a 
Crafting modiffier of +10 and the Magical Crafting feat. With 13 days 
of downtime ahead of him, he decides to craft 
bracers of armor 
2nd, 
a 4th-level item. The GM secretly chooses a DC of 17.
Ezren spends 3 days to begin the crafting process (since the item 
is 1 level lower than his level). The item has a Price of 950 sp, so 
Ezren expends 475 sp worth of raw materials. He has another 600 
sp worth of raw materials on hand. He rolls a 12 on his Crafting 
check, for a result of 22. That's a success! At this point, Ezren can 
spend 475 sp worth of materials to complete the item.
However, Ezren has 10 more days on his hands, so he decides to 
spend additional time to complete the item. Because he's a 5th-level 
character and an expert at Crafting, he reduces the amount he has 
to pay by 10 sp for each day spent. After spending 10 days working, 
he reduces the cost of completing the item from 475 sp to 375 sp. 
He spends the 375 sp, completes the bracers, and goes out on his 
next adventure. (He could have stayed home to keep working on 
the bracers, eventually reducing the item's total Price to just the 
half he paid up front, but adventuring is far more lucrative!)
If Ezren's Crafting check result was a 27 or higher, he'd have 
gotten a critical success. In that case, he'd reduce the remaining 
amount by 14 sp per day, lowering the amount needed to complete 
the item after 10 additional days of work to 335 sp.
GETTING FORMULASYou can get access to the formulas for all common items in the 
Equipment chapter by purchasing a basic crafter's book (see page 
184). See the rules on page 188 for information on how to acquire 
other formulas. CRAFTING AS A TRADEIf you want to make money by Crafting, you can work at 
producing common items for the market. This works just like the 
Practice a Trade activity of the Lore skill (see page 151), except 
that you use your Crafting skill instead of a Lore skill. You must 
be trained in Crafting. The GM determines what tasks are available to you. It's usually 
easy to ffind work making basic items at 1 or 2 levels below the 
level of your settlement. Higher-level tasks represent special 
commissions, which might require you to Craft a speciffic item 
using the normal Craft downtime activity and sell it to a buyer 
at full price. These opportunities don't come along as often and 
might have special requirements—or dire consequences if you fail 
to meet the demands of a prominent client. 
to afiect gain a +4 circumstance bonus to their Perception DCs 
against your attempts to Create a Diversion for 1 minute. 
Success You become merely sensed, rather than seen, with 
regard to each creature whose Perception DC your result 
meets or exceeds. This lasts until the end of your turn or until 
you act to do anything except Step or use the Hide or Sneak 
actions of the Stealth skill (see page 158). If you do anything 
else, your sensed condition ends just before you act. For 
instance, if you succeed at a Deception check, momentarily 
becoming sensed by a creature (rather than seen), and then 
attack that creature, it is not flat-footed against your attack. 
Failure
 You don't divert the attention of any creatures whose 
Perception DC exceeds your result, and those creatures are 
aware you were trying to trick them. 
IMPERSONATE
You create a disguise to pass yourself ofi as someone 
or something you are not. Putting together a decent 
disguise takes 10 minutes and requires a disguise kit (see page 
184), but a simpler, quicker disguise might do the job if you're not 
trying to imitate a speciffic individual, at the GM's discretion. 
In most cases, creatures have a chance to detect you only if 
they use the Seek action to roll Perception checks against your 
Deception DC. If you attempt to directly interact with someone 
while disguised, you need to roll a secret Deception check against 
that creature's Perception DC instead. If you're disguised as a 
speciffic individual, the GM might give creatures you interact with 
a bonus based on how well they know the person you're imitating, 
or ask you to roll a secret Deception check even if you aren't 
directly interacting with them.
Success You trick the creature into thinking you're the person 
you're disguised as. You might have to attempt a new check 
if your behavior changes.
Failure
 The creature can tell you're not who you claim to be.
LIEYou try to fool someone with an untruth. Doing so 
takes at least 1 round, or longer if the lie is elaborate. 
You roll a single Deception check and compare it 
against the Perception DC of every creature you are 
trying to fool. The GM may modify this DC based 
on the situation and the nature of the lie you are trying to tell. 
Elaborate or highly unbelievable lies are much harder to get a 
creature to believe than simpler and more believable lies, and some 
lies are so big it's impossible to get anyone to believe them.
At the GM's discretion, if a creature initially believes your lie, 
it might still be able to attempt a Perception check against your 
Deception DC (success on the creature's part gains the failure 
efiect below) to realize it's a lie. This usually happens if the creature 
discovers enough evidence to counter your statements. 
Success The target believes your lie.
Failure
 The target doesn't believe your lie and gains a 
+4 circumstance bonus to Perception checks against 
further attempts by you to Lie to it for the duration of your 
conversation. The target is also more likely to be suspicious 
of you in the future.
Concentrate
Manipulate
Auditory
Concentrate
LingualMentalSecret
150 DECEPTION 
 TRAINED ACTION
You can attempt the following use of Deception only if 
you are trained in this skill. FEINTRequirements
 You are within melee reach of 
the target. With a misleading fiourish, you leave an opponent unprepared 
for your real attack. You attempt a Deception check against that 
opponent's Perception DC.
Success The target is flat-footed against the next melee 
attack that you attempt against it before the end of your 
current turn.
Critical Success The target is flat-footed against all melee attacks 
you attempt against it until the end of your next turn.
Critical Failure
 You are flat-footed against melee attacks the 
target attempts against you until the end of your next turn.
DIPLOMACY (CHA)
You influence others through negotiation and flattery.
You can perform the following uses of Diplomacy even 
if you are untrained in the skill. GATHER INFORMATION
You canvass local markets, taverns, and gathering 
places in an attempt to learn about a speciffic 
individual or topic. The GM determines the DC of the check and 
the amount of time it takes (typically if you spend an entire day 
of downtime to Gather Information, you can attempt three or 
four checks), along with any beneffit you might be able to gain by 
spending coin on bribes, drinks, or gifts. Success You collect information about the individual or topic. 
The GM determines the speciffics. Critical Failure
 You collect incorrect information about the 
individual or topic. MAKE AN IMPRESSION
With at least 1 minute of conversation consisting 
of charismatic overtures, flattery, and other acts of 
goodwill, you seek to make a good impression on 
someone to make them temporarily agreeable. At 
the end of the conversation, attempt a Diplomacy check against 
the target's Will DC, modiffied by any circumstances the GM sees 
ffit. Good impressions (or bad impressions, on a critical failure) 
last for only the current social encounter unless the GM decides 
otherwise. The attitudes are listed in the Conditions section (see 
page 319). The attempt fails if the target can't understand you.
Success The target's attitude toward you improves by one step 
(from hostile to unfriendly, from unfriendly to indifferent, 
from indifferent to friendly, or from friendly to helpful).
Critical Success The target's attitude toward you improves by 
two steps (from hostile to indifferent, from unfriendly to 
friendly, or from indifferent or friendly to helpful).
Critical Failure
 The target's attitude toward you decreases by 
one step (from helpful to friendly, from friendly to indifferent, 
from indifferent to unfriendly, or from unfriendly to hostile.)
Mental
Downtime
Secret
Auditory
Concentrate
Lingual
Mental REQUEST
You can make a request of a creature that's friendly 
or helpful to you. You must couch the request in 
terms that the target would accept given their 
current attitude toward you. The GM sets the 
DC based on the diflculty of the request. Some requests are 
unsavory or impossible, and even a helpful NPC would never 
agree to them.
Success The target agrees to your request, but might demand 
added provisions or alterations to the request.
Critical Success The target agrees to your request without 
qualiffications, or agrees to a request that would ordinarily 
require it to have an attitude one step better toward you.
Failure
 The target refuses the request, though she might 
propose an alternative that is less extreme.
Critical Failure
 Not only does target refuse the request, but 
her attitude toward you also decreases by one step due to 
the temerity of the request.
INTIMIDATION (CHA)
You bend others to your will through threats.
You can perform the following uses of Intimidation 
even if you are untrained in the skill. COERCEWith threats either veiled or overt, you attempt 
to intimidate a creature into doing what you want. 
You must spend at least 1 minute of conversation 
with a creature you can see and who can either 
see or sense you. At the end of the conversation, 
you attempt an Intimidation check against the target's Will 
DC, modiffied by the circumstances at the GM's discretion. The 
attitudes referenced in the effects are listed in Conditions (see 
page 318).Success The target gives you the information you seek or 
agrees to follow your directives so long as they aren't 
likely to harm the target in any way. The target continues 
to comply for an amount of time determined by the GM 
but not exceeding 1 day, at which point the target becomes 
unfriendly (if it wasn't already unfriendly or hostile) 
and might act against you, including reporting you to 
the authorities. Critical Success
 Per a success, but even afterward, the 
target is too scared of you to retaliate against you.
Failure
 The target doesn't do what you say, and if it was not 
already unfriendly or hostile, it becomes unfriendly.
Critical Failure
 The target doesn't attempt the request, 
becomes hostile if it wasn't already, and can't be coerced 
by you for at least 1 week.
 DEMORALIZEWith a sudden shout, a well-timed taunt, or a 
cutting put-down, you can shake an enemy's 
resolve. Choose a creature within 30 feet of you 
who you sense or see and who can sense or see 
you. Attempt an Intimidation check against that 
Auditory
Concentrate
LingualMentalAuditory
Concentrate
EmotionLingualMentalAuditory
Concentrate
EmotionLingualMental151target's Will DC. If the target does not understand the language 
you are speaking, you're not speaking a language, or they can't 
hear you, you take a –4 circumstance penalty to the check and 
demoralize loses the lingual trait.
Success The target becomes frightened 1.Critical Success The target becomes frightened 2 and is fieeing until the end of its next turn.
Critical Failure
 You can't attempt to demoralize the target 
again for 10 minutes. 
LORE (INT)
You have specialized information on a narrow topic. Lore 
is different than other skills in two ways. 
First, the lore skill features many subcategories. You 
might have Military Lore, Sailing Lore, Vampire Lore, 
or any similar subcategory of skill. Each subcategory 
counts as its own skill, so applying a skill increase to 
Planar Lore wouldn't increase your modifier with 
Sailing Lore. You gain a subcategory of the Lore skill 
from your background. T
he GM determines what other 
subcategories she'll allow as Lore skills, though these 
categories are always less broad than any of the other 
skills that allow you to Recall Knowledge, and they 
should never be able to fully take the place of another 
skill's ability to Recall Knowledge. For instance, you 
couldn't choose Magic Lore in an attempt to recall 
the same breadth of knowledge covered by Arcana 
or Adventuring Lore in an attempt to gain all the 
information an adventurer would need. 
Second, all of your Lore skills are signature skills (see page 144). This means that you can advance them to expert or legendary proficiency if you so choose. If you have multiple subcategories of Lore that could apply to a check, or that would overlap with another skill in the circumstances, you can choose to use the skill with the better skill modifier or that you would prefer to use. If there's any doubt whether a Lore skill applies to 
a specific topic or use, the GM decides whether it can be used or not. You can perform the following action using any 
category of Lore, even if you are untrained in any Lore skill or a certain category of Lore. RECALL KNOWLEDGE
You can use Lore to remember a bit of knowledge 
related to your type of Lore. The GM determines the 
DCs for such checks and whether your Lore applies to the topic.
Success You recall the knowledge.
Critical Failure
 You recall erroneous knowledge.
LORE TRAINED ACTIVITY
You can attempt the following use of Lore only if you are 
trained in this skill. PRACTICE A TRADE
You apply the practical beneffits of your Lore 
specialty to earn money during periods of downtime. Practicing 
a Trade is most efiective with Lore specialties such as business, 
Concentrate
Secret
Downtime
152law, or sailing, where there's demand for workers. The GM might 
increase the DC if you're attempting to use an obscure Lore skill 
to practice a trade. The GM assigns a task level representing the diflculty of the 
most lucrative job available. You can go looking for lower-level 
tasks, with the GM determining whether you ffind any. Sometimes 
you can attempt to ffind better work than the initial ofierings, 
though this requires spending downtime to Gather Information 
or researching and socializing.
When you take on a job, the GM sets the DC of your Lore 
check. The amount of money you can earn depends on the task 
level and your profficiency rank, as listed on Table 4–4: Skill 
Income. You might also need specialized tools to accept a job, 
like mining tools to work in a mine or a merchant's scale to buy 
and sell valuables in a market.
You need to spend a minimum number of downtime days to 
locate and secure the job, prepare to practice your trade, and get 
started on the task. This number depends on your level and the 
level of the task. You must spend 4 downtime days for a task of 
your level. Reduce the number of days by 1 for each level lower 
than you the task is, to a minimum of 1 day. Conversely, increase 
the number of days by 1 for each level higher than you the task 
is. After this base downtime, you earn your initial amount of 
money, and you can continue at the task to keep earning more. 
The success entry explains how this works. Note that if you want 
to earn money for working just 1 day, you need to pick a task 
that requires only 1 day of preparation. A 0-level task always 
requires 1 day.
After you spend the base downtime to get started, roll your 
Lore check to determine your earnings. You continue to earn that 
amount each day for the duration of the job, without requiring 
further checks. The GM determines how long the job lasts, 
which is limited by how long the task will take to complete and 
other factors. Most tasks last a week or two, though some can 
take months or even years. If you stop in the middle of a task, 
normally you have to ffind a new task when you return, but the 
GM might decide that you can pick up where you left ofi (which 
usually happens only if the job is incomplete and the setup you 
did is still applicable).Success You do competent work and gain the amount of 
currency listed on Table 4–4: Skill Income for the task level 
and your profficiency rank. You can spend further downtime 
days working at this job, earning the same amount each 
day, up to the task's completion.
Critical Success You excel at the task. Per a success, but 
you earn money as though the task were 1 level higher. 
The GM might extend how long you can stay employed 
at the task.
Failure
 You do shoddy work and get paid the bare minimum 
for your time. You earn the amount listed in the failure 
column of Table 4–4: Skill Income. The GM will likely reduce 
how long you can continue at the task.
Critical Failure
 You earn nothing for your work and are ffired 
immediately. Your reputation sufiers, potentially making it 
diflcult for you to ffind rewarding jobs in that community 
in the future.
MEDICINE (WIS)You can patch up wounds and help people recover from 
diseases and poisons. You can perform the following use of Medicine even if 
you are untrained in the skill. ADMINISTER FIRST AID
Requirements
 You must have healer's tools (see 
page 186).You perform ffirst aid on an adjacent creature that is at 0 Hit 
Points in an attempt to stabilize or revive it. You can also perform 
ffirst aid on an adjacent creature taking persistent bleed damage. 
The DC for either is 15. If a creature is both dying and bleeding, 
choose which one you're trying to end before you roll. You can 
Administer First Aid again to attempt to remedy the other.
Success The creature at 0 Hit Points gains 1 Hit Point, or you 
end the persistent bleed damage (see page 323).Critical Failure
 A creature with 0 Hit Points has its dying 
condition increased by 1. A creature with persistent bleed 
damage takes damage equal to the amount of its persistent bleed damage. 
MEDICINE TRAINED USES
You can attempt the following uses of Medicine only if 
you are trained in this skill. TREAT DISEASE
Requirements
 You must have healer's tools (see 
page 186).You spend at least 8 hours caring for a diseased creature, helping 
it ffight ofi a malady. Attempt a Medicine check against the 
disease's DC.
Success You grant the creature a +2 circumstance bonus to its 
next saving throw against the disease.
Critical Success You grant the creature a +4 circumstance 
bonus to its next saving throw against the disease.
Critical Failure
 Your efiorts cause the creature to take a 
–2 circumstance penalty to its next save against the disease.
 TREAT POISON
Requirements
 You must have healer's tools (see 
page 186).You apply specialized treatments to prevent the spread of poison. 
Roll a Medicine check against the poison's DC.
Success You grant the creature a +2 circumstance bonus to its 
next saving throw against the poison.
Critical Success You grant the creature a +4 circumstance 
bonus to its next saving throw against the poison.
Critical Failure
 Your efiorts cause the creature to take 
a –2 circumstance penalty to its next save against the poison.
NATURE (WIS)
You know a great deal about the natural world, and you 
can command and train animals and magical beasts. You can perform the following uses of Nature even if 
you are untrained in that skill. Manipulate
Downtime
Manipulate
Manipulate
153 COMMAND AN ANIMAL
You issue an order to an animal that's obeying 
you, either because you previously used Handle 
an Animal successfully (see below) or you have the Ride feat 
(see page 170). Most animals know the Leap, Seek, Stand, Stride, 
and Strike basic actions. If an animal knows an activity, such 
as a horse's Gallop, you can command the animal to perform 
the activity, but you must spend as many Command an Animal 
actions as the activity's number of actions. The animal uses the 
action you command. 
Most animals understand only the simplest instructions, 
so you might be able to instruct your animal to move to a 
certain square but not dictate a speciffic path to get there, or 
command it to attack a certain creature but not to make its 
attack nonlethal. The GM decides the speciffics of the action 
your animal uses.
 HANDLE AN ANIMAL
You prepare a helpful animal to accept your 
commands. If you are trained in Nature, you can 
use Handle an Animal on a friendly or indifferent animal as
 well. 
Success Until the end of your turn, you can use the Command 
the Animal action to direct the animal. You can Mount the 
animal (see page 309). RECALL KNOWLEDGE
You can use Nature to remember a bit of 
knowledge on fiora, fauna, geography, weather, 
the environment, or creatures of natural signifficance. The GM 
determines the DCs for such checks. Success You recall the knowledge accurately.
Critical Failure
 You recall incorrect information.
NATURE TRAINED USES
You can perform the following uses of Nature only if you 
are at least trained in this skill. IDENTIFY MAGIC
Once you discover that an item, ongoing efiect, 
or location is magical, you can spend an hour to 
attempt to identify the nature and particulars of its magic. If 
your attempt is interrupted in any way, you must start over. 
The GM sets the DC for your check (see Table 4–2 on page 146). 
Cursed or particularly esoteric items usually have higher DCs 
or might even be impossible to identify using Nature alone. 
Heightening a spell doesn't increase the DC.
Success For an item or location, you get a sense of what it 
does and learn any means of activating it. For an ongoing 
efiect, you learn the efiect's name and what it does. You 
can't try again in hopes of getting a critical success.
Critical Success You learn all the attributes of the magic, 
including whether it is cursed. Failure
 You fail to identify the magic and can't try again for 
1 day.
Critical Failure
 You misidentify the magic as something else 
of the GM's choice.
Auditory
Concentrate
Auditory
Concentrate
Concentrate
Secret
Concentrate
Secret
TABLE 4–4: SKILL INCOME
Task 
Level
Failure
Trained
ExpertMasterLegendary
01 cp5 cp5 cp5 cp5 cp12 cp1 sp1 sp1 sp1 sp24 cp2 sp2 sp2 sp2 sp38 cp4 sp4 sp4 sp4 sp41 sp5 sp6 sp6 sp6 sp52 sp9 sp10 sp10 sp10 sp62 sp12 sp14 sp14 sp14 sp73 sp16 sp20 sp20 sp20 sp84 sp20 sp28 sp30 sp30 sp95 sp25 sp36 sp40 sp40 sp106 sp30 sp45 sp50 sp50 sp117 sp35 sp60 sp75 sp75 sp128 sp40 sp75 sp100 sp100 sp1310 sp50 sp100 sp150 sp150 sp1415 sp75 sp150 sp250 sp250 sp1520 sp100 sp200 sp350 sp350 sp1625 sp125 sp250 sp475 sp
500 sp1730 sp150 sp300 sp650 sp700 sp1840 sp200 sp450 sp900 sp1,000 sp1960 sp300 sp600 sp1,200 sp1,500 sp2075 sp375 sp750 sp1,500 sp2,000 sp20 (crit.)90 sp450 sp900 sp1,750 sp
2,500 spTRADE EXAMPLEHarsk is a 3rd-level ranger and an expert at harvesting and 
brewing tea. He has a Tea Lore bonus of +5. He has 30 days of 
downtime at his disposal and decides to work at a prestigious 
local tea house. The GM decides this is a 5th-level task if Harsk 
wants to assist the tea master, or a 2nd-level task if he wants to 
serve tea. Harsk chooses the tougher task, and the GM secretly 
sets the DC at 18.
Harsk spends 6 days training up and starting his job (since the 
task is 2 levels higher than him). He rolls a 6 on his Tea Lore check 
for a result of 11. Poor Harsk has failed! He earns only 2 sp for his 
efiorts that week.
The GM gives a choice: Harsk can either lower his ambitions 
and move over to serving in the tea house, or work with the 
tea master for 3 more days before searching for a new job. 
Harsk, now more aware of his own capabilities, accepts the less 
prestigious job for now. He spends 4 days preparing for his new 
job and attempts a new Tea Lore check against DC 13. Rolling an 
18, he gets a result of 23—a critical success! He earns 4 sp per day 
(like a success on a 3rd-level task). The GM rules that demand will 
be high enough that Harsk can work there for the remaining 20 
days of his downtime if he so chooses. Harsk accepts and pulls in 
a total of 86 sp that month.
154 LEARN A PRIMAL SPELL
If you are a primal spellcaster, you can gain access 
to a new primal spell from someone who knows that spell or from 
magical writing like a spellbook or scroll.
To learn the spell, you must do the following.

Ł Spend 1 hour per level of the spell, during which you must 
remain in conversation with the person who knows the spell 
or have the magical writing in your possession.

Ł Have an amount of magical materials with a value indicated in 
Table 4–2 on page 146.

Ł Attempt a Nature check with a DC determined by the GM (see 
Table 4–2).
Success You expend the materials and learn the spell. If you 
have a spellbook, the spell is added to your spellbook; if 
you prepare spells from a list, it's added to your list; if you 
have a spell repertoire, you can select it when you add or 
swap spells.
Critical Success Per a success, but you expend only half the 
cost in materials.
Failure
 You fail to learn the spell but can try again after you 
gain a level. The materials aren't expended.
Critical Failure
 Per a failure, plus you waste half the materials.
OCCULTISM (INT)
You have a great deal of knowledge about ancient 
philosophies, esoteric lore, obscure mysticism, and supernatural creatures. You can perform the following use of Occultism even if 
you are untrained in the skill. RECALL KNOWLEDGE
You can use Occultism to remember a bit of 
knowledge regarding ancient mysteries, obscure 
philosophy, or creatures of occult signifficance. The GM 
determines the DCs for such checks. Success You recall the knowledge accurately.
Critical Failure
 You recall incorrect information.
OCCULTI
SM TRAINED ACTIVITIESYou can attempt the following uses of Occultism only if 
you are trained in this skill. IDENTIFY MAGIC
Once you discover that an item, ongoing efiect, 
or location is magical, you can spend an hour to 
attempt to identify the particulars of its magic. If your attempt 
is interrupted, you must start over. The GM sets the DC for your 
check (see Table 4–2 on page 146). Cursed or esoteric items usually 
have higher DCs or might even be impossible to identify using 
Occultism alone. Heightening a spell doesn't increase the DC.
Success For an item or location, you get a sense of what it 
does and learn any means of activating it. For an ongoing 
efiect, you learn the efiect's name and what it does. You 
can't try again in hopes of getting a critical success.
Critical Success You learn all the attributes of the magic, 
including whether it is cursed. Concentrate
Concentrate
Secret
Concentrate
Secret
Failure
 You fail to identify the magic and can't try again for 
1 day.
Critical Failure
 You misidentify the magic as something else 
of the GM's choice.
LEARN AN OCCULT SPELL
If you are an occult spellcaster, you can gain access 
to a new occult spell from someone who knows that spell or from 
magical writing like a spellbook or scroll.
To learn the spell, you must do the following.

Ł Spend 1 hour per level of the spell, during which you must 
remain in conversation with the person who knows the spell 
or have the magical writing in your possession.

Ł Have an amount of magical materials with a value indicated in 
Table 4–2 on page 146.

Ł Attempt an Occultism check with a DC determined by the GM 
(see Table 4–2).
Success You expend the materials and learn the spell. If you 
have a spellbook, the spell is added to your spellbook; if 
you prepare spells from a list, it's added to your list; if you 
have a spell repertoire, you can select it when you add or 
swap spells.
Critical Success Per a success, but you expend only half the 
cost in materials.
Failure
 You fail to learn the spell but can try again after you 
gain a level. The materials aren't expended.
Critical Failure
 Per a failure, plus you waste half the materials.
READ ESOTERICA
You can read and understand occult writing, 
including complex metaphysical systems, syncretic 
principles, and incoherent ramblings, as long as it is in a language 
you can normally read. This usually takes about 1 minute per 
page of text. To read and understand the nuances of particularly 
archaic, esoteric, or obscure texts, the GM may require you to 
attempt an Occultism check to see if you understand the true 
meaning of the esoterica. The GM might have you attempt one 
check for the entire text or one check for each section of a 
larger text.
Success You understand the true meaning of the text.
Critical Failure
 You misread the text.
PERFORMANCE (CHA)With this skill you can perform in front of crowds.
BASIC COMPETENCESome performances require you to be more than just charismatic, and if you don't meet the demands of the 
art form or the audience, the GM might apply a penalty based on the relevant ability score. For example, if you're 
dancing and have a –1 Dexterity modifier, that penalty 
might apply to your dancing attempt. Likewise, if you are orating and have a –1 Intelligence modifier, you might 
have to hope your raw Charisma can overcome your intellectual shortcomings—or ask someone to help write your speeches!Concentrate
Concentrate
Secret
155 PERFORM
ANCE TRAIT
SWhen you use an action or activity that utilizes the 
Performance skill, it gains one or more traits relevant to the type of performance. The GM might change these depending on the circumstances, but the most common performance-based traits are given below.
Performance
Additional Traits
Act or perform comedy
Usually auditory, lingual, 
and visualDanceMove and visual
Play an instrument
Auditory and manipulate
Orate or sing
Auditory and lingual
You can use the following Performance action even if 
you are untrained in the skill. PERFORMWhen making a brief performance—one song, a quick dance, or a few jokes—you use the Perform action. This 
action is most useful when you want to prove your capability or 
impress someone quickly. Performing rarely has an impact on 
its own (unless you're in a contest), but doing so might influence 
the DCs of subsequent Diplomacy checks against the observers 
if the GM sees ffit. Success You prove yourself, and observers appreciate the 
quality of your performance.
Critical Success Your performance impresses the observers, 
and they're likely to share stories of your ability.
Concentrate
Failure
 Your performance falls flat.
Critical Failure
 You demonstrate only incompetence.
PERFORMANCE TRAINED ACTIVITY
You can use the following Performance activity only if 
you are at least trained in this skill. STAGE A PERFORMANCE
During downtime, you perform for an audience 
to make money. The GM determines the levels of the audiences 
available and gives you a brief description of the most discerning 
(high-level) audience you could perform for. You can go looking 
for lower-level audiences, with the GM determining whether you 
ffind any. Sometimes you can attempt to ffind better audiences, 
though this requires spending downtime to Gather Information 
or researching and socializing. A typical audience of commoners 
on the street is a 0-level audience, but a group of artisans with 
more reffined tastes might be a 2nd- or 3rd-level audience, and 
merchants, nobility, and royalty are increasingly higher level. The 
level of your audience is the task level for your performance.
When you choose your audience, the GM secretly sets the DC 
of your Performance check. The amount of money you can earn 
depends on the task level and your profficiency rank, as listed on 
Table 4–4: Skill Income (see page 153).
You need to spend a minimum number of downtime days to 
prepare for your performance, get out word to increase demand, 
allow time for the audience to plan attending, and play your 
ffirst show. The exact number of days depends on your level and 
the level of the task. You must spend 4 downtime days for a 
Downtime
156task of your level. Reduce the number of days by 1 for each level 
lower than you the task is, to a minimum of 1 day. Conversely, 
increase the number of days by 1 for each level higher than you 
the task is. After this base duration, you earn your initial amount 
of money, and you can continue performing over subsequent 
days to keep earning more. The success entry explains how 
this works. Note that if you want to earn money for performing 
for just 1 day, you need to pick an audience that requires you 
to spend only 1 day of preparation. Performing for a 0-level 
audience always requires 1 day.
After you spend the base downtime to get started, roll your 
Performance check to determine your earnings. If you do well, the 
GM might determine you can extend your performance, working 
more shows to bring in more money; this does not require further 
checks. Eventually, however, your performance will end because 
you've exhausted your audiences. The GM might let you perform 
the same show for other audiences, reducing or eliminating the 
preparation time but lowering the task level. 
Most performances can be staged for a couple weeks, or longer 
if you perform rarely and do other things with the rest of your 
downtime. Sometimes, taking time ofi from performing a show can 
draw in new high-level audiences, though this usually means you 
have to spend some time preparing again since you're rusty.
Success Your performance is competent and moving. You're 
rewarded with applause and whistles, plus the amount of 
currency listed on Table 4–4: Skill Income for the task level 
and your Performance profficiency rank. You can spend 
further downtime days on this performance, earning the same 
amount each day, until you exhaust your audience's interest.
Critical Success Your performance inspires belly laughs, tears, 
or a change of heart among your audience. Per a success, 
but you earn money as though the task were 1 level higher. 
The GM might extend how long audiences stay interested.
Failure
 The audience is ambivalent or unimpressed by your 
performance. They respond with yawns and blank stares, 
and a few coins of pity. You earn the amount listed in the 
failure column of Table 4–4: Skill Income. The GM will likely 
reduce how long you can keep audience interest.
Critical Failure
 Your awful performance turns the audience 
against you. They boo, hiss, and throw fruit or worse as 
they hassle you to end your performance. You earn nothing 
and your reputation sufiers, potentially making it diflcult 
to ffind discerning and rewarding audiences.
RELIGION (WIS)The secrets of deities, dogma, faith, and the realms of 
divine creatures both sublime and sinister are open to 
you. You also understand how magic works, though your 
training gives a religious slant to that knowledge. You can perform the following use of Religion even if 
you are untrained in the skill. RECALL KNOWLEDGE
You can use Religion to remember a bit of 
information on the subject of divine agents, the 
ffiner points of theology, and obscure myths regarding a faith. 
Concentrate
Secret
You can also recall some bit of lore about creatures with divine 
signifficance. The GM determines the DCs for such checks. Success You recall the knowledge accurately.
Critical Failure
 You recall incorrect information.
RELIGION TRAINED ACTIVITIES
You can perform the following uses of Religion only if 
you are at least trained in this skill. IDENTIFY MAGIC
Once you discover that an item, ongoing efiect, 
or location is magical, you can spend an hour to 
attempt to identify the particulars of its magic. If your attempt 
is interrupted, you must start over. The GM sets the DC for your 
check (see Table 4–2 on page 146). Cursed or esoteric items usually 
have higher DCs or might even be impossible to identify using 
Religion alone. Heightening a spell doesn't increase the DC.
Success For an item or location, you get a sense of what it 
does and learn any means of activating it. For an ongoing 
efiect, you learn the efiect's name and what it does. You 
can't try again in hopes of getting a critical success.
Critical Success You learn all the attributes of the magic, 
including whether it is cursed. Failure
 You fail to identify the magic and can't try again for 
1 day.
Critical Failure
 You misidentify the magic as something else of 
the GM's choice.
LEARN A DIVINE SPELL
If you're a divine spellcaster, you can gain access 
to a new divine spell from someone who knows that spell or from 
magical writing like ancient text written on a temple wall or a scroll.
To learn the spell, you must do the following.

Ł Spend 1 hour per level of the spell, during which you must 
remain in conversation with the person who knows the spell 
or have the magical writing in your possession.

Ł Have an amount of magical materials with a value indicated in 
Table 4–2 on page 146.

Ł Attempt a Religion check with a DC determined by the GM 
(see Table 4–2 on page 146).
Success You expend the materials and learn the spell. If you 
have a spellbook, the spell is added to your spellbook; if 
you prepare spells from a list, it's added to your list; if you 
have a spell repertoire, you can select it when you add or 
swap spells.
Critical Success Per a success, but you expend only half the 
cost in materials.
Failure
 You fail to learn the spell but can try again after you 
gain a level. The materials aren't expended.
Critical Failure
 Per a failure, plus you waste half the materials.
READ SCRIPTURE
You can read and understand religious writing, 
including allegories, homilies, and proverbs, as long 
as it is in a language you can normally read. This usually takes about 
1 minute per page of text. To read and understand the nuances of 
Concentrate
Secret
Concentrate
Concentrate
Secret
157particularly archaic or obscure texts, the GM may require you to 
attempt a Religion check to see if you understand the true meaning 
of the scripture. The GM might have you attempt one check for the 
entire text or one check for each section of a larger text.
Success You understand the true meaning of the text.
Critical Failure
 You misread the text.
SOCIETY (INT)You understand the people and systems that make civilization 
run, and you know the historical events that make societies 
what they are today. Further, you can use that knowledge 
to navigate the twisted workings of settlements, whether 
they're physical, societal, or economic. You can perform the following uses of Society even if 
you are untrained in the skill. RECALL KNOWLEDGE
You can use Society to remember a bit of knowledge 
regarding local history, important personalities, 
and legal institutions, or about creatures with complex societies. 
The GM determines the DCs for such checks. Success You recall the knowledge accurately.
Critical Failure
 You recall incorrect information.
SUBSIST ON THE STREETS
You ffind shelter and beg or scrounge enough food 
for at least yourself and maybe for other creatures as well. The 
GM determines the DC based on the nature of the settlement in 
which you are trying to subsist. You may need to have a minimum 
profficiency to use this downtime activity in more dangerous or 
highly organized settlements.
Success You acquire enough food for yourself and your shelter 
gives you basic protection from the elements, providing a 
subsistence living. Critical Success You can either provide a subsistence living for 
yourself and one additional creature, or you can improve your 
own food and shelter, granting yourself a comfortable living.
Failure
 You are exposed to the elements and don't get enough 
food; you become fatigued until you attain suflcient food 
and shelter.
Critical Failure
 City guards, criminals, or other dangerous 
elements fiush you out of your shelter and put you on notice, 
and you take a –2 circumstance penalty to Society checks 
to Subsist in the Streets for 1 week. You don't ffind any food 
at all; if you don't have any stored up, you're in danger of 
starving or dying of thirst if you continue critically failing.
SOCIETY TRAINED ACTIVITIES
You can perform the following uses of Society only if you 
are at least trained in this skill. CREATE FORGERY
You create a forged document, usually over the 
course of several hours, a day, or a week. You
 must have the proper writing material to create a forgery. If the 
document's handwriting doesn't need to be speciffic to a person, 
Concentrate
Secret
Downtime
Downtime
Secret
you need only to have seen a similar document before, and 
you gain up to a +4 circumstance bonus to the check (the GM 
determines the bonus). To forge a speciffic person's handwriting, 
you need a sample of that person's handwriting.
Once someone observes the document, the GM rolls your 
Society check. If the result exceeds 20, the GM compares it to the 
observer's Society DC. If the result is 20 or lower, the observer 
uses Perception or Society, whichever is higher. An observer who 
is closely scrutinizing documents on the lookout for a forgery can attempt a Perception or Society check against your Society 
DC (if they succeed, they know your document is a forgery). 
Once the GM rolls your check for a document, that same result 
is used no matter how many creatures observe that document.
Success The forgery goes undetected. Failure
 The observer knows your document is a forgery.
DECIPHER WRITING
You can take at least 1 minute per page (usually an 
hour per page or longer) in an attempt to decipher 
writing in an unfamiliar language, a coded message, or text 
written in an incomplete or archaic form. The DC is determined 
by the GM based on the state of the document.
Success You understand the general content of the page.
Critical Success You have a thorough understanding of the 
page's content, if not an exact word-for-word translation.
Failure
 You can't understand the document and take a 
Concentrate
Secret
PERFORMANCE EXAMPLELem is a 16th-level bard and legendary with his fiute. He has 
a Performance bonus of +30 with his enchanted fiute. With 
30 days of downtime ahead of him, Lem wonders if he can 
ffind something that might excite him more than performing 
in front of a bunch of stufiy nobles. He decides to spend 7 
days of downtime researching to see if he can ffind a more 
prestigious audience, and the GM decides that he ffinds a 
momentous ofier indeed—a performance in a celestial realm, and Lem's patron goddess Shelyn might even be in 
attendance! This is a 20th-level task, requiring Lem to spend 
8 of his remaining 23 days for preparation and setup (since 
the task is 4 levels higher than him), but Lem accepts it in a 
heartbeat. The GM secretly sets the DC at 38.
Lem rolls an 11 on his Performance check for a result of 
41. Success! Performances continue for 7 more days, and at 
the end, the grateful celestials present Lem with a beautiful 
living diamond rose in constant bloom worth 16,000 silver 
pieces (2,000 silver pieces per day for 8 days). 
With 8 days of downtime left, Lem also accepts a 14th-level 
task performing at a prestigious bardic college for members 
of a royal court, which requires only 2 days of setup (since it's 
2 levels below Lem's level). The GM secretly sets the DC at 30, 
and Lem critically succeeds, earning 350 silver pieces per day 
for 7 days, for a total of 2,450 silver pieces. Between the two 
performances, Lem earned nearly 20,000 silver pieces during 
his downtime, though he's not sure if he'll ever sell that rose. 
158–5
 circumstance penalty to further Society checks to 
decipher the writing on that page.
Critical Failure
 You believe you understand the text on that 
page, but you have in fact misconstrued its message.
STEALTH (DEX)
You are skilled at avoiding detection, allowing you to slip 
past foes, hide, or conceal an item on your person. You can perform the following uses of Stealth even if 
you are untrained in the skill. CONCEAL AN OBJECT
Hiding a small object on your person (such as a 
weapon of light Bulk) requires a Stealth check. 
When you try to sneak a hidden object past someone who might 
notice it, the GM rolls your Stealth check and compares it to this 
passive observer's Perception DC. If the creature is speciffically 
searching you for an item, they can attempt a Perception check 
against your Stealth DC (ffinding the object on success). 
You can also conceal an object somewhere other than your 
person, such as among undergrowth or in a secret compartment 
within a piece of furniture. In this case, characters Seeking in an 
area compare their Perception check results to your Stealth DC 
to determine whether they ffind the object. 
Success The object goes undetected. Failure
 The searcher ffinds the object.
 HIDEYou huddle behind cover or deeper into concealment 
to become merely sensed, rather than seen (see page 302). The 
GM rolls your Stealth check in secret and compares the result to 
the Perception DC of each creature that could potentially see you 
but that you have cover against or are concealed from.
If you successfully became sensed to a creature, but then 
cease to have cover against that creature or be concealed from 
it, it again sees you. Such creatures see you if you do anything 
other than Hide or Sneak, though the GM might allow you to 
perform a particularly unobtrusive action, activity, free action, 
or reaction without being noticed, possibly requiring another 
Stealth check. Success If the creature could see you, you're now sensed by 
the creature instead of seen. If you were unseen by the 
creature, you remain unseen. 
 SNEAKYou can attempt to move to another place while 
becoming or staying unseen. Stride up to half your 
Speed. (You can use Sneak while Burrowing, Climbing, Flying, 
or Swimming instead of Striding if you have the corresponding 
movement type.)
The GM rolls your Stealth check in secret and compares the 
result to the Perception DCs of creatures that you were sensed 
or unseen by at the start of your movement.
You automatically become seen if you don't have cover or 
aren't concealed from them at any time during your movement, 
or as soon as you do anything other than Hide or Sneak. The 
Manipulate
Secret
Secret
Move
Secret
GM might allow you to perform a particularly unobtrusive 
action, activity, free action, or reaction without being noticed, 
possibly requiring another Stealth check. If you speak or make 
a deliberate loud noise, you become sensed. If you do anything 
else, you become seen just before you act. For instance, if you 
attack a creature you're unseen by, that creature is not flat-
footed against that attack.
If you're unseen by a creature and it's impossible for that creature 
to see you (such as when you're invisible, the observer is blinded, 
or you're in darkness and the creature can't see in darkness), you 
automatically treat the result of your d20 roll as a 20 against that 
creature on your checks to Sneak. You also continue to be unseen 
if you lose cover against or are no longer concealed from such a 
creature. Acting to do something other than Hide or Sneak makes 
you sensed instead of seen. If a creature senses you via Seek, you 
must Sneak to become unseen by it again.
Success You become unseen by the creature (or remain so) 
during your movement and remain unseen by the creature 
at the end of it.
Failure
 You're seen by the creature throughout your movement 
and remain so. If you're invisible and were sensed by the 
creature, you're still sensed throughout your movement 
and remain sensed, but you aren't seen.
SURVIVAL (WIS)
You are skilled at living in the wilderness, foraging for 
food and building shelter, and with training you discover 
the secrets of tracking and hiding your trail. You can perform the following uses of Survival even if 
you are untrained in the skill. SENSE DIRECTION
Using the stars, the position of the sun, traits of 
the geography or fiora, or the behavior of fauna, you can stay 
oriented in the wild. Typically, you roll only once per day, but some 
environments or changes might necessitate rolling more often. 
The GM determines the DC and how long this activity takes. More 
exotic locales or those you're unfamiliar with might require you to 
have a minimum profficiency rank to Sense Direction.
Success You gain enough orientation to avoid becoming 
hopelessly lost. If you are in an environment with cardinal 
directions, you have a sense of those directions. 
SURVIVE IN THE WILD
You build or maintain a shelter and forage enough 
food for yourself and maybe for other creatures as well. The GM 
determines the DC based on the nature of the wilderness you are 
trying to survive in. More exotic locales may require you to have a 
minimum profficiency rank to use this downtime-activity.
Success You forage enough food for yourself, and your shelter 
gives you basic protection from the elements, providing a 
subsistence living. Critical Success You can either provide a subsistence living for 
yourself and one additional creature, or you can improve your 
own food and shelter, granting yourself a comfortable living.
Failure
 You are exposed to the elements and don't get 
Secret
Downtime
159enough food, becoming fatigued until you get suflcient 
food and shelter.
Critical Failure
 Your shelter is severely damaged or 
destroyed, and you take a –2 circumstance penalty to 
Survival checks to Survive in the Wild for 1 week. You 
don't ffind any food at all; if you don't have any stored 
up, you're in danger of starving or dying of thirst if you 
continue critically failing. SURVIV
AL TRAINED
 ACTION
SYou can perform the following uses of Survival only if you 
are at least trained in this skill. COVER TRACKS
You cover your tracks, moving at half your Speed. 
You don't need to roll a Survival check to cover 
your tracks, but anyone tracking you must exceed your Survival 
DC if it is higher than the normal DC to track. TRACK
You follow tracks, moving at half your Speed. 
After a successful check to Track, you can 
continue following the tracks at half your Speed without rolling 
additional checks for up to 1 hour. You need to attempt a check 
anytime something signifficant changes in the trail, as well as 
once every hour. The GM determines the DCs for such checks, 
depending on the freshness of the trail, the weather, and the 
type of ground.
Success You ffind the trail or continue to follow the one you're 
already following.
Failure
 You lose the trail but can try again after a 1-hour delay.
THIEVERY (DEX)
You are trained in a particular set of skills favored by 
thieves and miscreants. Disabling devices and picking locks either are aided by or require the use of thieves' tools (see page 187).You can perform the following uses of Thievery even if 
you are untrained in the skill. PALM AN OBJECT
Palming a small (usually of negligible Bulk), 
unattended object without being noticed requires a Thievery 
check against the Perception DCs of creatures who have you 
within their sight. You take the object whether or not you 
successfully conceal that you did so.
Success If your result meets or exceeds every observer's 
Perception DC, you palm the object without being detected.
Failure
 If your result is lower than an observing creature's 
Perception DC, that creature notices you palming the 
object. The GM determines the creature's response.
 STEAL AN OBJECT
Stealing a small (usually of negligible Bulk) object from another person can be very diflcult. If the object is worn 
but relatively unattended (like a loosely carried pouch ffilled with 
Concentrate
Move
Concentrate
Move
Manipulate
Manipulate
coins, or an object within such a pouch), the DC to steal the item without detection is equal to the creature's Perception DC. You 
can't steal an object that's more closely guarded (in a pocket, for 
example), nor can you steal from a creature who is in combat 
or otherwise on guard. The GM determines the response of any 
creature that notices your theft.
The GM might impose a penalty on your check if the nature 
of the object makes it harder to steal (such as a very small item 
in a large pack, or a sheet of parchment mixed in with other 
documents). The GM can also penalize the Perception DC of 
observers if they're distracted.
Success You steal the item without the bearer noticing, or an 
observer doesn't see you take or attempt to take the item. 
Failure
 The item's bearer notices your attempt before you can 
take the object, or an observer sees you take or attempt to 
take the item. THIEVERY
 TRAINED
 ACTION
SYou can perform the following uses of Thievery only if 
you are at least trained in this skill. DISABLE A DEVICE
Requirements
 Some devices require you to use 
thieves' tools (see page 187) when disabling them.
This action allows you to disarm a trap or some other complex 
device. Often, a device requires numerous successes before 
becoming disabled, depending on its construction and complexity. 
Thieves' tools are helpful and sometimes even required to disable 
a device, as determined by the GM, and sometimes a device 
requires a higher profficiency rank in Thievery to disable it.
Success You achieve one success toward disabling the device.
Critical Success You achieve two successes toward disabling 
the device. If you complete the process of disabling 
the device with this check, you leave no trace of your 
tampering, and you can rearm the device later, if the type 
of device can be rearmed.
Critical Failure
 You either undo one success you've already 
gained or, if you have no successes, you set ofi the device.
 PICK A LOCK
Requirements
 You must be using thieves' tools 
(see page 187).Opening a lock without a key is very similar to Disabling a Device, 
but the DC of the check is determined by the complexity and 
construction of the lock you are attempting to pick. Unlocking 
even the simplest of mechanisms almost always requires three 
or more successful checks to accomplish. If you lack the proper 
tools, the GM might let you used improvised picks, which are 
treated as poor-quality tools.
Success You gain one success toward opening the lock.
Critical Success You gain two successes toward opening the lock.
Critical Failure
 You either undo one success you have already 
gained, or, if you have no successes, you break your tools. 
The tools can be used while broken, but are treated as poor-
quality tools. Repairing them requires replacing the tools 
(costing 6 sp, or 50 sp for expert-quality thieves' tools).
Manipulate
Manipulate
160 TABLE 5–1: GENERAL FEATS
Non-Skill Feats
Level
Traits
Prerequisites
Adopted Ancestry
1 General—Alertness1 General—Ancestral Paragon1 General—Armor Proficiency
1 General—Breath Control
1 General—Diehard
1 General—Fast Recovery
1 GeneralConstitution 14 Feather Step
1 GeneralDexterity 14
Fleet1 General—Great Fortitude
1 General
Trained in Fortitude saves
Hefty Hauler1 GeneralStrength 12
Incredible Initiative
1 General—Iron Will
1 General
Trained in Will saves
Lightning Reflexes
1 General
Trained in Reflex saves
Remarkable Resonance
1 GeneralCharisma 12 Ride1 General—Shield Proficiency
1 General
Trained in light armor
Toughness
1 General—Weapon Proficiency
1 General—Expeditious Search
7 GeneralMaster in Perception
Varying Skill Feats
Level
Traits
Prerequisites
Assurance1 General, Skill
Trained in at least one skill
Dubious Knowledge
1 General, Skill
Trained in a skill with the Recall Knowledge action
Quick Identification
1 General, Skill
Trained in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, or Religion
Recognize Spell
1 General, Secret, Skill
Trained in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, or Religion
Scribe Scroll
1 Downtime, General, 
Manipulate, Skill 
Trained in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, or Religion
Skill Training
1 General, SkillIntelligence 12 Trick Magic Item
1 General, Manipulate, Skill
Trained in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, or Religion
Automatic Knowledge
2 General, SkillExpert in a skill with the Recall Knowledge action, Assurance in 
chosen skillMagical Shorthand2 General, SkillExpert in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, or Religion
Quick Recognition
7 General, SkillMaster in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, or Religion; Recognize Spell
Acrobatics Skill Feats
Level
Traits
Prerequisites
Cat Fall
1 General, Skill
Trained in Acrobatics
Steady Balance1 General, Skill
Trained in Acrobatics
Nimble Crawl
2 General, SkillExpert in Acrobatics
Quick Squeeze
2 General, SkillExpert in Acrobatics
Kip Up7 General, Move, Skill
Master in Acrobatics
Legendary Contortionist
15 General, SkillLegendary in Acrobatics
Some abilities require a degree of training but can be learned by anyone, not only 
members of certain ancestries or classes. These abilities are called general feats. For most 
classes, you gain a general feat when you reach 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter. 
You can select any feat whose prerequisites you satisfy. General feats also include skill 
feats, which expand on what you can accomplish via skills. Most characters gain skill 
feats at 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter; see your class for details.
GENERAL FEATS
161 Arcana Skill Feats
Level
Traits
Prerequisites
Arcane Sense
1 General, Skill
Trained in Arcana
Athletics Skill Feats
Level
Traits
Prerequisites
Defensive Climber
1 General, Skill
Trained in Athletics
Quick Jump1 General, Skill
Trained in Athletics
Underwater Marauder
1 General, Skill
Trained in Athletics
One-Handed Climber2 General, SkillExpert in Athletics
Powerful Leap
2 General, SkillExpert in Athletics
Rapid Mantel2 General, SkillExpert in Athletics
Quick Climb7 General, SkillMaster in Athletics  
Quick Swim
7 General, SkillMaster in Athletics
Wall Jump
7 General, SkillMaster in Athletics
Legendary Climber
15 General, SkillLegendary in Athletics, Quick Climb
Legendary Swimmer
15 General, SkillLegendary Athletics, Quick Swim
Crafting Skill Feats
Level
Traits
Prerequisites
Alchemical Crafting1 General, Skill
Trained in Crafting
Quick Repair
1 General, Skill
Trained in Crafting
Snare Crafting
1 General, Skill
Trained in Crafting
Specialty Crafting1 General, Skill
Trained in Crafting
Magical Crafting2 General, SkillExpert in CraftingInventor
7 Downtime, General, 
 SkillMaster in CraftingImpeccable Craft15 General, SkillLegendary in Crafting, Specialty Crafting
Deception Skill Feats
Level
Traits
PrerequisiteSCHarming Liar1 General, Skill
Trained in Deception
Close Match
1 General, Skill
Trained in Deception
Confabulator
2 General, SkillExpert in DeceptionLengthy Diversion
2 General, SkillExpert in DeceptionLie to Me2 General, SkillExpert in DeceptionQuick Disguise2 General, SkillExpert in DeceptionCruel Deceiver
7 General, SkillMaster in DeceptionSlippery Secrets
7 General, SkillMaster in DeceptionLegendary Impersonator
15 General, SkillLegendary in Deception, Quick Disguise
Diplomacy Skill Feats
Level
Traits
Prerequisites
Group Impression
1 General, Skill
Trained in Diplomacy
Hobnobber1 General, Skill
Trained in Diplomacy
Bargain Hunter2 General, SkillExpert in DiplomacyGlad-Hand2 General, SkillExpert in DiplomacyShameless Request
7 General, SkillMaster in DiplomacyLegendary Negotiator
15 General, SkillLegendary in Diplomacy
Intimidation Skill Feats
Level
Traits
Prerequisites
Intimidating Glare
1 General, Skill
Trained in Intimidation
Quick Intimidation
1 General, Skill
Trained in Intimidation
Group Coercion
2 General, SkillExpert in Intimidation
Intimidating Prowess
2 General, SkillStrength 16, expert in Intimidation 
Lasting Coercion
2 General, SkillExpert in Intimidation
Battle Cry
7 General, SkillMaster in Intimidation
Scare to Death
15 Death, Emotion, Fear, 
General, SkillLegendary in Intimidation
Lore Skill Feats
Level
Traits
Prerequisites
Additional Lore
1 General, Skill
Trained in Lore
Experienced Professional
1 General, Skill
Trained in Lore
Unmistakable Lore
2 General, SkillExpert in Lore
Legendary Professional
15 General, SkillLegendary in Lore
Medicine Skill Feats
Level
Traits
Prerequisites
Battle Medic
1 General, Healing, Manipulate, Skill
Trained in Medicine
Robust Recovery
2 General, SkillExpert in MedicineLegendary Medic
15 General, SkillLegendary in Medicine
162 Nature Skill Feats
Level
Traits
Prerequisites
Train Animal
1 Downtime, General, 
Manipulate, Skill
Trained in Nature
Bonded Animal2 Downtime, General, Skill
Expert in Nature
Natural Medicine
2 General, SkillExpert in Nature
Occultism Skill Feats
Level
Traits
Prerequisites
Oddity Identification
1 General, Skill
Trained in Occultism
Performance Skill Feats
Level
Traits
Prerequisites
Fascinating Performance
1 General, Skill
Trained in Performance
Virtuosic Performer
1 General, Skill
Trained in Performance
Impressive Performance
2 General, SkillExpert in Performance
Legendary Performer
15 General, SkillLegendary in Performance, Virtuosic Performer
Religion Skill Feats
Level
Traits
Prerequisites
Student of the Canon1 General, Skill
Trained in Religion
Society Skill Feats
Level
Traits
Prerequisites
Courtly Graces1 General, Skill
Trained in Society
Cultural Familiarity
1 General, Skill
Trained in Society
Multilingual1 General, Skill
Trained in Society
Read Lips
1 General, Skill
Trained in Society
Sign Language1 General, Skill
Trained in Society
Streetwise
1 General, Skill
Trained in Society
Connections2 General, SkillExpert in Society, Courtly Graces
Legendary Codebreaker
15 General, SkillLegendary in Society
Legendary Linguist
15 General, SkillLegendary in Society, Multilingual
Stealth Skill Feats
Level
Traits
Prerequisites
Experienced Smuggler1 General, Skill
Trained in Stealth
Terrain Stalker
1 General, Skill
Trained in Stealth
Quiet Allies2 General, SkillExpert in StealthFoil Senses
7 General, SkillMaster in StealthSwift Sneak
7 General, SkillMaster in StealthLegendary Sneak
15 General, SkillLegendary in Stealth, Swift Sneak
Survival Skill Feats
Level
Traits
Prerequisites
Forager
1 General, Skill
Trained in Survival
Survey Wildlife
1 General, Skill
Trained in Survival
Experienced Tracker
2 General, SkillExpert in Survival
Planar Survival
7 General, SkillMaster in Survival
Legendary Survivalist
15 General, SkillLegendary in Survival
Thievery Skill Feats
Level
Traits
Prerequisites
Pickpocket1 General, Skill
Trained in Thievery
Subtle Theft1 General, Skill
Trained in Thievery
Wary Disarmament
2 General, SkillExpert in Thievery
Quick Unlock7 General, SkillMaster in Thievery
Spell Thievery
7 General, SkillMaster in Thievery
Legendary Thief
15 General, SkillLegendary in Thievery, Pickpocket
  ADDITIONAL LORE FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Lore
The breadth of your knowledge has increased 
to encompass a new field. Choose an additional Lore skill 
subcategory. You become trained in it and it counts as a 
signature skill. At 3rd, 5th, and 13th levels, you gain an 
additional skill increase you can apply only to Lore. When you 
select this feat, you gain the skill increases immediately for all 
listed levels at or below your current level.
Special You can select this feat more than once, choosing a 
new subcategory of Lore each time and gaining the listed skill 
increases to that Lore.
GeneralSkillADOPTED ANCESTRY FEAT 1
 Whether adopted at birth, earned through rite of 
passage, or bonded through a deep friendship or romance, you 
have become fully immersed in another ancestry's culture and 
traditions. Choose a common ancestry. You can take ancestry feats 
from the ancestry you chose, in addition to your character's own 
ancestry, as long as the ancestry feats don't require any feature of 
that ancestry's physiology, as determined by the GM.
ALCHEMICAL CRAFTING FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in CraftingYou can use the Craft activity to create alchemical 
GeneralGeneralSkill163items in addition to mundane ones. When you select this feat, 
you immediately gain the formulas for four common level 1 
alchemical items. If you have a formula book, you can put these 
into the book. ALERTNESS FEAT 1
 You remain alert to threats around you. You gain 
expert proficiency in Perception.
ANCESTRAL PARAGON FEAT 1
 Whether instinctively, through study, or through 
a mystic sense, you feel a deeper connection to your ancestry 
than most of those who share that ancestry. You gain a level-1 
ancestry feat.
ARCANE SENSE FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Arcana
Your study of magic allows you to sense its 
presence around you instinctively. You can cast level 1 
detect magic as an innate spell at will. If you are a master of Arcana, it 
becomes level 3, and if you are legendary in Arcana, it becomes 
level 4.
ARMOR PROFICIENCY FEAT 1
 You become trained in light armor. If you already 
were trained in light armor, you gain training in medium 
armor, and if you were trained in both, you become trained 
in heavy armor.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time 
you select this feat, you become trained in the next type of 
armor as appropriate (first light armor, then medium armor, 
then heavy armor).
ASSURANCE FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in at least one skill
Even in the worst circumstances, you can 
perform basic tasks with your skill. Choose a skill you're 
trained in when you first select this feat. You can forgo rolling 
a skill check for your chosen skill to instead receive a result of 
10 (do not apply any of your bonuses, penalties, or modifiers).
If you're an expert in your chosen skill, you receive a result 
of 15; if you're a master, you receive a result of 20; and if 
you're legendary, you receive a result of 30.
Special You can select this feat multiple times. Each time you 
do, you choose a different skill, and gain the benefits for the 
chosen skill. AUTOMATIC KNOWLEDGE FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in a skill with the Recall 
Knowledge action, Assurance in that skill
You know basic facts ofi the top of your head. Choose a skill you're 
an expert in that has the Recall Knowledge action and that you 
have the Assurance feat in when you first select this feat. You can 
use the Recall Knowledge action for that skill as a free action once 
per round, triggering at either the start or the end of your turn; if 
you do, you must use Assurance on the skill check.
GeneralGeneralGeneralSkillGeneralGeneralSkillGeneralSkillSpecial You can select this feat multiple times. Each time you 
do, you choose a different skill and gain the benefits for the 
chosen skill. BARGAIN HUNTER FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Diplomacy
You can spend the day Gathering Information 
specifically about deals on items rather than other information. 
Name an item or a general category of items (such as "magic 
weapons") you're looking for and then roll your Diplomacy 
check. Any bonuses you have when Gathering Information 
apply. The GM sets the DC based on the population of the 
settlement, the difficulty of finding the easiest-to-find item, 
how many merchants are in the area, and similar factors. If you 
choose not to buy the item using a deal right away, the GM 
determines whether the deal is still good later on. This type of 
Gather Information action has special outcomes on a success 
or critical success. 
You can also use the Practice a Trade activity with Diplomacy 
instead of the Lore skill, spending your days hunting bargains 
and reselling at a profit.
Success You find a deal on the item you were looking for. 
You can purchase it at a discount equal to the value of a 
successful Practice a Trade check for a task of your level 
(see page 151), to a minimum value of half the item's Price 
after the discount. Critical Success You find an incredible deal on the item you 
were looking for. You can purchase it at a discount equal 
to the value of a successful Practice a Trade check for a 
task of 1 level higher than your level (see page 151), to a 
minimum value of half Price after the discount.
BATTLE CRY FEAT 7
 Prerequisites
 master in Intimidation
When you roll initiative, as long as you can 
perceive at least one foe, you can yell a mighty battle cry 
and Demoralize a foe as a free action. If you have legendary 
Intimidation, you can also Demoralize as a reaction when you 
succeed or critically succeed at an attack.
 BATTLE MEDIC FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in MedicineYou can patch up yourself or an adjacent ally, 
even if you're in the middle of combat. In order to 
do so, you must attempt a DC 20 Medicine check. 
Regardless of your result, the target is bolstered to your use of 
Battle Medic.
If you're a master of Medicine, you can instead attempt a 
DC 25 check to increase the Hit Points regained by 2d10, and 
if you're legendary, you can instead attempt a DC 30 check to 
increase the Hit Points regained by 4d10.
Success The target regains Hit Points equal to 1d10 plus your 
Wisdom modifier.
Critical Success As success, but target regains 1d10 
additional HP.
Critical Failure
 The target takes 1d10 damage. GeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralHealingManipulate
Skill164 BONDED ANIMAL FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Nature
You can spend 7 days of downtime with a normal 
animal (not a companion, familiar, or other special 
animal) attempting to bond with it. At the end of the 7 days, 
attempt a DC 20 Nature check: if you succeed, you form a bond 
with the animal. Bonding with a new animal ends any previous 
bond you had. You can't have both a bonded animal and an 
animal companion (or have a bonded animal that is also an 
animal companion).During combat, you can give an orders to your bonded animal 
more easily. You can use the Command an Animal action as a 
free action triggered after your first Handle an Animal action of 
the round.
BREATH CONTROL FEAT 1
 You have incredible control of your breathing, 
granting you advantages when air is short and allowing you 
to instinctually hold your breath when necessary. Even if you 
don't Breathe Deep, you can take actions equal to three times 
your Constitution score before sufiocating. If you do Breathe 
Deep, you can take actions equal to ten times your Constitution 
score. You gain a +1 circumstance bonus on saving throws 
against inhaled poisons and other threats you breathe in, and 
you treat successes on such saving throws as critical successes.
CAT FALL FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Acrobatics
Your catlike aerial acrobatics allow you to cushion 
your fall. Treat all falls as if you fell 10 fewer feet. If you're an 
expert in Acrobatics, treat falls as 25 feet shorter. If you're a 
master in Acrobatics, treat them as 50 feet shorter. If you're 
legendary in Acrobatics, you always land on your feet and don't 
take damage, regardless of the distance of the fall. 
CHARMING LIAR FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in DeceptionWhen you get a critical success with the Lie 
action, the target's attitude toward you improves by one 
step, as though you'd succeeded at using Diplomacy to Make 
an Impression. This works only once per conversation, and if 
you get critical successes against multiple targets using the 
same result, you choose which creature's attitude to improve. 
You must be lying in a way that appears to impart important 
information
 —in other words, your lie must make the target 
grateful for your supposed help, which trivial or irrelevant lies 
can't achieve.
CLOSE MATCH FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in DeceptionYou're androgynous, look a bit older or younger 
than you are, or look like you might have an ancestry other than 
your own. Choose a different gender, an age other than your 
own, or an ancestry the same size as yours. You can disguise 
yourself as that sort of person without taking a penalty to your 
Deception check. At the GM's discretion, if you are extremely 
Downtime
GeneralSkillGeneralGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillsmall or big for your size, you can choose an ancestry of a size 
different from your own.
CONFABULATOR FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Deception
Even after you are caught in falsehoods, you pile 
lie upon lie. Reduce the bonus a target gets for your previous 
attempts to Create a Diversion or Lie to it from +4 to +2. If 
you're a master in Deception, reduce the bonus to +1. If you're 
legendary in Deception, your web of lies is so efiective that 
your targets don't get these bonuses at all.
CONNECTIONS FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Society, Courtly Graces
You have social connections you can leverage to 
trade favors or meet important people. Whenever you're in an 
area where you have connections (typically in a settlement 
where you've spent downtime building connections, or possibly 
in another settlement in the same nation), you can attempt a 
Society check to either arrange a meeting with an important 
political figure or attempt to get a favor in exchange for a 
later favor of your contact's choice. The GM decides the DC of 
the Society check based on the difficulty of the favor and the 
prominence of the figure.
COURTLY GRACES FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in SocietyYou either were raised among the nobility or have 
learned proper etiquette and bearing as well as noble lineages, 
allowing you to present yourself as a member of the nobility. You 
can use the Recall Knowledge action with Society to gain useful 
facts about these topics, using the DC for Nobility Lore if it is 
lower, and you can use your Society modifier on all Nobility Lore 
checks. If you want to impersonate a specific noble or create a 
false noble backstory for yourself, you still need to additionally 
use Deception when presenting yourself in your noble persona.
CRUEL DECEIVER FEAT 7
 Prerequisites
 master in DeceptionYou've mastered the art of distracting your foes 
to leave them exposed to your attack. When you Create a 
Diversion, if you use a Strike action, you remain unseen until 
after the end of the action, instead of becoming seen before 
the action. CULTURAL FAMILIARITY FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in SocietyYou've spent most of your life surrounded by people 
of a single ancestry and know how to get along with creatures 
of that ancestry whenever it's necessary or expedient to do so. 
Choose one human ethnicity or one of the following ancestries: 
dwarf, elf, gnome, goblin, or halfling. You gain a +1 circumstance 
bonus to Diplomacy checks and Performance checks targeting 
creatures of that ethnicity or ancestry, and to Society checks to 
Recall Knowledge about that ethnicity or ancestry. The GM might 
allow you to choose other cultures instead.
GeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkill165 DEFENSIVE CLIMBER FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Athletics
You are trained in climbing techniques that allow 
you to twist and weave as you climb without sacrificing your 
grip. You're not flat-footed while climbing.
DIEHARD FEAT 1
 It takes more to kill you than most. You die from 
the dying condition at dying 5, rather than dying 4.
DUBIOUS KNOWLEDGE FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in a skill with the Recall 
Knowledge action
You're a treasure trove of information, but not all of it is from 
reputable sources. When you fail a Recall Knowledge check 
using any skill that has that action, you learn one bit of true 
knowledge and one bit of erroneous knowledge, but you don't 
have any way to differentiate which is which.
EXPEDITIOUS SEARCH FEAT 7
 Prerequisites
 master in Perception
You have a system that lets you search at great speed, finding 
details and secrets twice as quickly as others can. When searching, 
you take half as long as usual to search a given area. This also 
allows you to move twice as quickly while exploring and ensure 
you've searched an area before walking into it. If you're legendary 
in Perception, you instead search areas four times as quickly.
EXPERIENCED PROFESSIONAL FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Lore
You carefully safeguard your professional 
endeavors to prevent disaster. When you Practice a Trade, you 
treat a critical failure as a failure. You must choose one of your 
GeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralGeneralSkillLore subcategories when you select this feat. The feat applies 
to only the chosen subcategory.
Special You can select this feat multiple times. Each time you do, 
choose a different Lore subcategory and gain the feat's benefits 
for the chosen subcategory.
EXPERIENCED SMUGGLER FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in StealthYou often smuggle things past the authorities. 
When the GM rolls your Stealth check to see if a passive 
observer notices a small item you have concealed, she uses 
the number rolled or 10, whichever is higher. If you're a master 
in Stealth, she uses the number rolled or 15, and if you're 
legendary in Stealth, you automatically succeed at hiding a 
small concealed item from a passive observer. This provides no 
benefits when a creature attempts a Perception check while 
actively searching you for hidden items. Due to your skill at 
smuggling, you are more likely to find more lucrative smuggling 
tasks when using Underworld Lore to Practice a Trade.
EXPERIENCED TRACKER FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Survival
Tracking is second nature to you, and when 
necessary you can follow a trail without pause. You can Track 
while moving at full Speed by taking a –5 penalty to your Survival 
check. If you're a master in Survival, you don't take the –5 penalty. 
If you're legendary in Survival, you no longer need to roll a new 
Survival check every hour when tracking, though you still need to 
roll whenever there are significant changes in the trail.
FASCINATING PERFORMANCE FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Performance
When you use the Perform action, compare your 
GeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkill166check result to the Will DC of one observer. If you succeed, the 
target is fascinated with you for 1 round; if the observer is in 
a situation that demands immediate attention, such as combat, 
you must critically succeed to fascinate the target. You must 
choose which creature you're attempting to fascinate before 
you roll your check, and regardless of your result, the target is 
bolstered against your Fascinating Performance.
If you're an expert in Performance, you can compare your 
check result to the Will DCs of up to four observers and fascinate 
any number of them. If you're a master in Performance you can 
fascinate up to 10 observers with a single check, and if you're 
legendary in Performance you can try to fascinate any number 
of observers at the same time.
FAST RECOVERY FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 Constitution 14 Your body bounces back from extreme situations 
much more quickly than most. You recover twice as many 
Hit Points from resting. Each time you succeed at a Fortitude 
save against an ongoing toxin, you reduce its stage by 2, or 
by 1 against a virulent toxin. Each critical success you achieve 
against an ongoing toxin reduces its stage by 3, or by 2 against 
a virulent toxin. In addition, you reduce the severity of your 
drained condition by 2 when you rest for a night instead of by 
1. You reduce your enervated condition by 2 when you succeed 
at your Fortitude save or spend a day of downtime training, and 
by 3 when you critically succeed at your Fortitude save. For 
more information on these conditions, see page 321. FEATHER STEP FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 Dexterity 14
You step carefully and quickly, even in adverse 
environments. You can Step into difficult terrain (see page 312).
FLEET FEAT 1
 You move quickly both on and ofi the battlefield. 
Your Speed increases by 5 feet.
FOIL SENSES FEAT 7
 Prerequisites
 master in StealthYou are adept at foiling creatures' special senses 
and paranoid enough to take precautions against all of them 
at all times. Whenever you use the Hide or Sneak actions, 
you are always considered to be taking precautions against 
special senses (see the Detecting with Other Senses sidebar 
on page 302). 
FORAGER FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Survival
While Surviving in the Wilderness during 
downtime, you can always find enough food and water to 
provide yourself a subsistence living (provided you aren't in 
an area that's completely lacking in appropriate resources). 
If you are trained but not better, finding food and water for 
another or providing a comfortable living still requires you to 
attempt Survival checks and hope for a critical success; on 
GeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillany other successful result, you still find only enough for your 
own
 subsistence. If you're an expert, even without rolling you can always 
find enough food and water for your own comfortable living or 
subsistence living for yourself and one other creature that eats 
roughly as much as a human, and on a critical success you find 
enough for a second additional creature. 
If you're a master, you can always find enough for 
comfortable living for yourself and one other or subsistence 
living for yourself and two others without rolling, and you can 
provide for twice as many others on a critical success.
If you're legendary, you can always find enough for 
comfortable living for yourself and four others or subsistence 
living for yourself and eight others without rolling, but a critical 
success provides no additional benefit.
Multiple smaller creatures or creatures with significantly 
smaller appetites than a human are counted as a single creature 
for this feat, and larger creatures or those with significantly 
greater appetite each count as multiple creatures. The GM 
determines how much a particular non-human creature needs 
to eat.
GLADflHAND FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Diplomacy
First impressions are your strong suit. When you 
meet someone, you can immediately attempt a Diplomacy check 
to Make an Impression with a –5 penalty rather than needing to 
converse for 1 minute. On a success, you don't gain any further 
benefit for spending 1 minute in conversation, but if you fail or 
critically fail, you can engage in 1 minute of conversation and 
attempt a new check at the end of that time rather than accepting 
the failure or critical failure result. This functions only when you 
meet someone in a social situation, not if you encounter them in 
a hostile situation such as a combat encounter.
GREAT FORTITUDE FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Fortitude saves
Your physique is incredibly hardy. You gain expert proficiency 
in Fortitude saves.
GROUP COERCION FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Intimidation
When you use the Coerce activity, you can 
compare your Intimidation check result to the Will DCs of two 
targets instead of one. It's possible to get a different degree of 
success for each target. The number of targets you can Coerce 
in a single action increases to five if you're a master, and 10 if 
you're legendary.
GROUP IMPRESSION FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in DiplomacyWhen you Make an Impression, you can compare 
your Diplomacy check result to the Will DCs of two targets 
instead of one. It's possible to get a different degree of success 
for each target. The number of targets increases to four if you're 
an expert, 10 if you're a master, and 25 if you're legendary.
GeneralSkillGeneralGeneralSkillGeneralSkill167 HEFTY HAULER FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 Strength 12
You can carry more than your frame implies. Increase your 
maximum and encumbered Bulk limits by 2.
HOBNOBBER FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in DiplomacyYou can attempt to Gather Information twice as 
many times as usual during a day of downtime (typically six to 
eight attempts instead of three to four). 
IMPECCABLE CRAFT FEAT 15

Prerequisites
 legendary in Crafting, Specialty 
CraftingWhenever you succeed at a Crafting check to make an item of 
the type you chose with Specialty Crafting, you gain the efiect 
of a critical success instead. IMPRESSIVE PERFORMANCE FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Performance
Your performances move hearts and win you 
fans wherever you go. You can Make an Impression using 
Performance instead of Diplomacy.
INCREDIBLE INITIATIVE FEAT 1
 You react more quickly than others can in any 
situation. You gain a +1 circumstance bonus to all initiative rolls, 
whether they're Perception checks, skill checks, or any other 
kind of rolls.
INTIMIDATING GLARE FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Intimidation
You can Demoralize those around you with a mere 
glare. When you do, Demoralize loses the auditory trait and 
gains the visual trait, and you don't take a penalty when you 
attempt to Demoralize a creature that doesn't understand your 
language or can't hear you.
INTIMIDATING PROWESS FEAT 2
 Prerequisites 
Strength 16, expert in Intimidation
In situations where you can physically menace 
the target of your Coerce or Demoralize attempts, you gain a +1 
circumstance bonus to your Intimidation check and you ignore 
the penalty for not sharing a language. If your Strength score 
is 20 or higher and you have the master proficiency rank in 
Intimidation, this bonus increases to +2.
INVENTOR FEAT 7
 Prerequisites
 master in CraftingYou are a genius at Crafting, easily able to 
determine how things are made and create new 
inventions. You can spend downtime to invent a common 
formula that you don't know. This works just like the Craft 
skill: you spend a number of days in preparation and half the 
Price of the formula up front, roll a Crafting check, and on a 
success either finish the formula by paying the difierence or 
GeneralGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralGeneralSkillGeneralSkillDowntime
GeneralSkillwork for longer to decrease the Price. The difierence is that you 
spend the additional time in research, design, and development, 
rather than in creating an item.
IRON WILL FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Will saves
Your mental defenses are an iron fortress. You gain expert 
proficiency in Will saves.
 KIP UP FEAT 7
 Prerequisites
 master in Acrobatics
Trigger
 Your turn begins and you are prone.
You stand back up. This movement doesn't trigger reactions. 
LASTING COERCION FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Intimidation
When you succeed or critically succeed at an 
attempt to Coerce someone, they help you for up to a week or 
until their task is complete, as determined by the GM.
LEGENDARY CLIMBER FEAT 15

Prerequisites
 legendary in Athletics, Quick Climb
You gain a climb Speed equal to your Speed.
LEGENDARY CODEBREAKER FEAT 15

Prerequisites
 legendary in SocietyYour skill with languages and codes is so great 
that you can decipher information with little more than a 
quick read through a text. You can Decipher Writing while 
reading at normal speed. If you slow down and spend the 
full amount of time that's ordinarily required, treat a success 
as a critical success; if you critically succeed while spending 
the normal amount of time, you gain a nearly word-for-word 
understanding of the document. LEGENDARY CONTORTIONIST FEAT 15

Prerequisites
 legendary in Acrobatics
When you successfully Squeeze, you move 
through the tight space at full Speed.
 LEGENDARY IMPERSONATOR FEAT 15

Prerequisites
 legendary in Deception, Quick DisguiseYou set up a full disguise with which you can Impersonate 
someone with incredible speed.
LEGENDARY LINGUIST FEAT 15

Prerequisites
 legendary in Society, Multilingual
You are so skilled with languages that you can 
create pidgin languages instantly to communicate. You can 
always talk to any creature that has a language, even one you 
don't share, in very simple terms and conveying only basic 
concepts, using a new pidgin language of your own creation. 
You must first understand at least the basic medium of 
communication the creature uses (speech, sign language, and 
so on).GeneralGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkill168 LEGENDARY MEDIC FEAT 15

Prerequisites
 legendary in MedicineYou've invented new medical procedures or 
discovered ancient techniques that can achieve nearly miraculous 
results. Once per day for each target, you can spend 1 hour treating 
the target and attempt a Medicine check to remove a disease or 
the blinded, deafened, drained, or enervated condition. Use the DC 
of the disease or of the spell or efiect that created the condition. 
If the efiect's source is an artifact, a creature above 20th level, or 
other similarly powerful source, increase the DC by 5.
 LEGENDARY NEGOTIATOR FEAT 15

Prerequisites
 legendary in DiplomacyYou use your incredible skill at persuasion to 
negotiate quickly in adverse situations. You attempt to Make an 
Impression and then immediately Request that your opponent 
cease their current activity and engage in negotiations. The GM 
sets the DC of the Request based on the circumstances; some 
creatures might simply refuse, and even those who agree might 
ultimately find your arguments lacking.
LEGENDARY PERFORMER FEAT 15

Prerequisites
 legendary in Performance, Virtuosic 
Performer
Your fame as a performer of the type you chose with Virtuosic 
Performer has spread throughout the lands. An NPC who 
succeeds at a DC 10 Society check to Recall Knowledge has 
heard of you, and whenever you Stage a Performance, you can 
typically attract higher-level audiences to your performance, as 
determined by the GM.
LEGENDARY PROFESSIONAL FEAT 15

Prerequisites
 legendary in Lore
Your fame in your chosen lore has spread 
throughout the lands (for instance, if you have Warfare Lore, you 
might be a legendary general or tactician). An NPC who succeeds at a DC 10 Society check to Recall Knowledge has heard of you, 
and when you Practice a Trade with that Lore skill, you can 
typically find higher-level tasks, as determined by the GM.
LEGENDARY SNEAK FEAT 15

Prerequisites
 legendary in Stealth, Swift Sneak
When you employ an exploration tactic other than 
sneaking, you also gain the benefits of the sneaking tactic unless 
you choose not to. See page 316 for more about exploration tactics.
LEGENDARY SURVIVALIST FEAT 15

Prerequisites
 legendary in Survival
You can survive indefinitely without food or water 
and can endure severe and extreme cold and heat without taking 
damage from doing so.
LEGENDARY SWIMMER FEAT 15

Prerequisites
 legendary in Athletics, Quick Swim
You move through the water like a fish, gaining a 
swim Speed equal to your land Speed.
GeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillLEGENDARY THIEF FEAT 15

Prerequisites
 legendary in Thievery, Pickpocket
Your ability to steal items defies belief. You can 
attempt to Steal an Object that is actively wielded or that would 
be extremely noticeable or time-consuming to remove (like worn 
shoes or armor). You must do so slowly and carefully, spending at 
least 1 minute and significantly longer for items that are normally 
time-consuming to remove (like armor). Throughout this duration 
you must have some means of staying hidden, whether under 
cover of darkness or in a bustling crowd, for example. You take 
a –5 penalty on your Thievery check. Even if you succeed, if 
the item is extremely prominent, like a suit of full plate armor, 
onlookers will quickly notice it's gone after you steal it.
LENGTHY DIVERSION FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Deception
When you critically succeed using Deception to 
Create a Diversion, you continue to remain only sensed after 
the end of your turn. This efiect lasts for an amount of time 
depending on the diversion and the situation, as determined by 
the GM (but for a minimum of 1 additional round).
For instance, if Merisiel runs away after throwing a rock in the 
opposite direction to make noise and achieves a critical success 
on her Deception check, the guards might continue chasing in 
the direction of the rock until they either give up pursuit or 
notice consequences of Merisiel's later actions.
LIE TO ME FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Deception
You know how to exploit your enemy's falsehoods 
to your own advantage in negotiations. When you succeed at 
an attempt to tell whether someone is hiding something from 
you (usually with a Seek action) or your target fails a Deception 
check to Lie to you, you gain a +2 circumstance bonus to your 
next Deception, Diplomacy, Intimidation, or Performance check 
against them. LIGHTNING REFLEXES FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Reflex saves
Your reflexes are lightning fast. You gain expert proficiency in 
Reflex saves.
MAGICAL CRAFTING FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Crafting
You can use the Craft activity to create magic 
items in addition to mundane ones. Many magic items have 
special crafting requirements, such as access to certain spells, 
as listed in the item entry in Chapter 11.When you select this feat, you gain the formulas for four 
common magic items of level 2 or lower.
MAGICAL SHORTHAND FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, 
or Religion
Learning new spells comes easily to you. Choose arcane, divine, 
occult, or primal; you can choose a magic tradition only if you are 
GeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralGeneralSkillGeneralSkill169an expert in the associated skill. You take only 10 minutes per 
spell level to learn a spell of that type, rather than 1 hour per spell 
level. If you fail to learn a spell of that type, you can try to learn it 
again after 1 week or after you gain a level, whichever comes first. 
If you're a master in the chosen type of magic's associated skill, 
learning a spell takes only 5 minutes per spell level, and if you're 
legendary in that skill, it takes only 1 minute per spell level.
Special You can select this feat multiple times. Each time you 
do so, select a different magic tradition in whose associated 
skill you are an expert.
MULTILINGUAL FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in SocietyIt's easy for you to pick up new languages. You learn 
two new languages, chosen from common languages, uncommon 
languages, and any others you have access to. These languages 
take the same form (signed or spoken) as your other languages.
Special You can select this feat multiple times. Each time, you 
learn two new languages.
NATURAL MEDICINE FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Nature
You can spend 10 minutes applying natural cures 
to heal a creature, after which you must attempt a DC 20 Nature 
check. On a success, the target regains Hit Points equal to 1d8 
plus your Wisdom modifier. If you're a master of Nature, the 
target regains an additional 1d8 Hit Points. You can use this feat 
to heal a particular creature only once per day.
If you're in the wilderness, you might have easier access to fresh 
ingredients, allowing you to restore an additional 1d8 Hit Points on 
a success or critical success, subject to the GM's determination. 
NIMBLE CRAWL FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Acrobatics
You're skilled at moving around while prone. You 
can Crawl up to half your Speed, rather than 5 feet. If you're a 
master in Acrobatics, you can Crawl at your full Speed, and if 
you're legendary, you aren't flat-footed while prone.
ODDITY IDENTIFICATION FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in OccultismTwisting the mind and divining possibilities or 
concurrent events are hallmarks of occult spells, and your 
study has taught you to identify these types of spells. You gain 
a +2 circumstance bonus on Occultism checks to Identify Magic 
with the mental, possession, prediction, or scrying trait.
ONE-HANDED CLIMBER FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Athletics
You can Climb even if one of your hands is 
occupied. You must still have one hand and both legs available 
in order to Climb.
PICKPOCKET FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Thievery
You can Palm or Steal Objects that are closely 
GeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillguarded, such as an object in a creature's pocket or a loose 
ring. You can't steal objects that are actively wielded or that 
would be extremely noticeable or time-consuming to remove 
(like worn shoes or armor). If you're a master in Thievery, you 
can attempt to steal from a creature even if it's in combat or 
otherwise on guard. When you're doing so, Stealing an Object 
requires 2 manipulate actions instead of 1.
PLANAR SURVIVAL FEAT 7
 Prerequisites
 master in Survival
You can attempt to Survive in the Wild on different 
planes, even those without the resources or natural phenomena 
you normally need. For instance, you can forage for food even 
if the plane lacks food that could normally sustain you, and you 
could find your bearings on a plane that doesn't have stars, a sun, 
or other normal aids to navigation. A success at Surviving in the 
Wild can reduce the plane's damage as well, at the GM's discretion.
POWERFUL LEAP FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Athletics
When you use the Leap action, you can jump 
5 feet up with a vertical Leap, and you increase the distance 
you can jump horizontally by 5 feet.
QUICK CLIMB FEAT 7
 Prerequisites
 master in Athletics
When Climbing, you move at half your Speed on 
a success and at full Speed on a critical success. This doesn't 
afiect you if you're using a climb Speed.
QUICK DISGUISE FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Deception
You can set up a disguise in half the usual time 
(generally 5 minutes). If you're a master, it takes one-fifth the 
usual time (usually 2 minutes), and if you're legendary, it takes 
one-tenth the usual time (usually 1 minute).
QUICK IDENTIFICATION FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Arcana, Nature, Occultism 
or Religion
You take only 10 minutes when using Identify Magic to determine 
the properties of an item, ongoing efiect, or location, rather than 
1 hour. If you're an expert, it takes 5 minutes; if you're a master, it 
takes 1 minute; and if you're legendary, it takes 3 rounds.
QUICK INTIMIDATION FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Intimidation
You can Coerce others with little more than a few 
choice implications, allowing you to Coerce a creature after 
1 round of conversation instead of 1 minute.
QUICK JUMP FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Athletics
You can use High Jump and Long Jump as a single 
action instead of 2 actions. If you do, you don't perform the 
initial Stride, and you don't need to have moved 10 feet.
GeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkill170 QUICK RECOGNITION FEAT 7
 Prerequisites
 master in Arcana, Nature, 
Occultism, or Religion; Recognize Spell
You can Recognize Spells swiftly. Once per round, you can use 
Quick Recognition to use the Recognize a Spell feat using a skill 
in which you are a master as a free action instead of a reaction.
QUICK REPAIR FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in CraftingYou take only 10 minutes to Repair an item, rather 
than 1 hour. If you're an expert, it takes 5 minutes; if you're 
a master, it takes 1 minute; and if you're legendary, it takes 
3 rounds.
QUICK SQUEEZE FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Acrobatics
When you succeed at the Squeeze action, you can 
move 5 feet per round instead of 5 feet per minute. On a critical 
success, you can Squeeze 10 feet per round.
QUICK SWIM FEAT 7
 Prerequisites
 master in Athletics
When swimming, you move 5 more feet on a 
success and 10 more feet on a critical success, to a maximum 
of your land Speed.
QUICK UNLOCK FEAT 7
 Prerequisites
 master in Thievery
When you succeed at a check to Pick a Lock, you 
gain two successes instead of one. When you critically succeed 
at such a check, you gain three successes instead of two.
QUIET ALLIES FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Stealth
You're skilled at helping your allies minimize the 
noise and glare of their armor. While an ally is within 30 feet 
of you, their check penalty to Stealth checks from armor is 
reduced by 2. This doesn't stack with benefits from another 
character with Quiet Allies or any other ability that reduces 
check penalties from armor.
RAPID MANTEL FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Athletics
When you perform a Leap and grab the edge 
of a surface, you can immediately pull yourself up onto that 
surface into a standing position as part of your action. If you're 
a master in Athletics, you can also pull yourself up as part of a 
successful Grab Edge reaction.
 RECOGNIZE SPELL FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, 
or Religion
Trigger
 A creature casts a spell within line of 
sight of you, or a trap or similar inanimate object triggers and 
casts a spell. You must be aware the creature is casting a spell 
or the trap is triggering. GeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSecret
SkillThe GM rolls a secret Arcana, Nature, Occultism, or Religion 
check, whichever corresponds to the tradition of the spell being 
cast. If you're not trained in the skill, you can't get a result 
better than failure. The DC of the check is 10 plus triple the 
level of the spell. The DC for an uncommon spell is usually 2 
higher, and 5 higher for a rare spell.
Success You correctly recognize the spell.
Critical Success You correctly recognize the spell and get a 
+1 circumstance bonus to your saving throw or your AC to 
defend against it (if applicable).Failure
 You fail to recognize the spell.
Critical Failure
 You misidentify the spell as another spell 
entirely, of the GM's choice.
READ LIPS FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in SocietyYou can read the lips of others nearby who you can clearly see. 
When you're at your leisure, you can do this automatically. In 
encounter mode or when attempting a more difficult feat of lip 
reading, you are fascinated and flat-footed during each round in 
which you focus on the lip movements, and you must succeed 
at a Society check (DC determined by the GM) to successfully 
read someone's lips in such circumstances. 
If you are deaf or hard of hearing and have Read Lips, 
you recognize the lip movements for the spoken form of 
your languages. You can also speak the spoken form of your 
languages clearly enough for others to understand you, so long 
as you can produce sound vocally.
REMARKABLE RESONANCE FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 Charisma 12 Increase your maximum Resonance Points by 2.
RIDE FEAT 1
 You can use the Command an Animal action to 
control a mount without having to first use Handle an Animal. 
See page 153 for more information.
ROBUST RECOVERY FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Medicine
Your physiology is especially strong against 
diseases and poisons, and you have learned folk medicine that 
allows you to help others recover from them as well. When 
you treat a disease or a poison, or someone else uses one of 
these actions to benefit you, increase the circumstance bonus 
granted on a success to +4. SCARE TO DEATH FEAT 15

Prerequisites
 legendary in Intimidation
Attempt an Intimidation check against the Will 
DC of a living creature within 30 feet of you that 
you sense or see and who can sense or see you. If 
the target does not understand the language you 
are speaking, or it can't hear you, you take a –4 circumstance 
penalty to the check. A creature subjected to this action 
becomes bolstered against all Scare to Death actions.
GeneralGeneralGeneralGeneralSkillDeath
EmotionFear
GeneralSkill171 Success The target becomes frightened 2 and is fleeing for 
1 round.
Critical Success The target must succeed at a Fortitude save 
against your Intimidation DC or die. On a successful save, 
the target is frightened 2 and fleeing for 1 round.
Failure
 The target is frightened 1.Critical Failure
 The target is unafiected. SCRIBE SCROLL FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, 
or Religion
You can write spells onto scrolls, allowing you 
to cast them later without spending a spell slot. 
You use the Craft activity as described on page 148, but you 
can make only scrolls. Instead of attempting a Crafting check, 
you attempt a check with the appropriate skill for the spell's 
tradition—Arcana for a spell on the arcane spell list, Nature for 
a primal spell, Occultism for an occult spell, and Religion for a 
divine spell. If a spell appears on multiple spell lists, you can 
choose which of the applicable skills to use. You must have access to a spell in order to scribe it onto 
a scroll.
SHAMELESS REQUEST FEAT 7
 Requirements:
 master in DiplomacyYou can downplay the potential consequences or 
outrageousness of your requests through sheer brazenness and 
charm. When Requesting something, you treat a critical failure 
as a failure. 
SHIELD PROFICIENCY FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in light armorYou become trained in shields.
Downtime
GeneralManipulate
SkillGeneralSkillGeneralSIGN LANGUAGE FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in SocietyYou learn the sign languages associated with the 
languages you know, allowing you to both sign and understand 
signs in each of those languages. 
SKILL TRAINING FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 Intelligence 12 You become trained in the skill of your choice.
Special You can select this feat multiple times, choosing a new 
skill to become trained in each time. SLIPPERY SECRETS FEAT 7
 Prerequisites
 master in DeceptionSpells that attempt to read your mind, detect 
whether you are lying, or reveal your alignment must succeed 
at a spell roll against your Deception DC or they reveal nothing.
SNARE CRAFTING FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in CraftingYou can use the Craft activity to create snares, 
using the rules from page 357. When you choose this feat, 
you gain the formulas for four common snares. If you have a 
formula book, you can put these formulas into the book.
SPECIALTY CRAFTING FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in CraftingYour training focused on Crafting one particular 
kind of item. Select one of the specialties listed below; you 
gain a +2 circumstance bonus on Crafting checks to Craft items 
of that type. If it's unclear whether the specialty applies, the 
GM decides. Some specialties might only partially apply. For 
example, if you were making a morningstar and had specialty in 
GeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkill172woodworking, the GM might give you half your bonus because 
the item requires both blacksmithing and woodworking.
SpecialtyApplicable ItemsAlchemy*Alchemical items such as elixirsArtistryFine art, including jewelry
BlacksmithingDurable metal goods, including metal armorBookmakingBooks and paperGlassmakingGlass, including glassware and windows
Leatherworking
Leather goods, including leather armor
Pottery
Ceramic goodsShipbuildingShips and boats
StonemasonryStone goods and structures
Tailoring
ClothingWeaving
Textiles, baskets, and rugs
Woodworking
Wooden goods and structures
* You must have the Alchemical Crafter skill feat to Craft 
alchemical items. SPELL THIEVERY FEAT 7
 Prerequisites
 master in Thievery
If you use Palm an Object or Steal an Object on a 
scroll, spellbook, or similar item, you can remove the magical 
writing without disturbing the parchment or other surface it 
was inscribed upon. When you do, you must have a blank scroll 
or page in your possession that you can transfer the magical 
writing onto, or else the magic is expended and lost. The GM 
usually applies a penalty to observers' Perception checks and 
DCs to notice the theft, unless the writing is on open display 
(in the case of an unfurled scroll, for example). You gain a 
+2 circumstance bonus to your check because you don't need 
to collect the entire object. However, higher-level magic is 
harder to steal, so the DC is increased by the spell's level.
STEADY BALANCE FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Acrobatics
You can keep your balance easily, even when 
balancing in adverse conditions. You treat a success using the 
Balance action as a critical success. You're not flat-footed while 
attempting to Balance on narrow surfaces and uneven ground, 
and if you're the target of an attack or efiect that requires a 
saving throw, you fall only if you critically fail your attempt to 
Maintain Balance. STREETWISE FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in SocietyYou know about life on the streets and feel the 
pulse of your local settlement. You can use your Society bonus 
instead of your Diplomacy bonus to Gather Information. In 
any settlement you frequent regularly, you can use the Recall 
Knowledge action with Society to know the same sorts of 
information that you could discover with Diplomacy to Gather 
Information. The DC is usually significantly higher, but you 
know the information without spending time gathering it. If 
you fail to recall the information, you can still subsequently 
attempt to Gather Information normally.
GeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillSTUDENT OF THE CANON FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Religion
You've researched the fundamental tenets of 
many faiths enough to recognize notions about them that are 
unlikely to be true. When attempting a Religion check to Read 
Scripture or to Recall Knowledge about the tenets of faiths, you 
treat a critical failure as a failure instead.
SUBTLE THEFT FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Thievery
When you successfully Steal an Object, observers 
(other than the creature you stole from) take a –2 circumstance 
penalty to their Perception DCs to detect your theft. 
Additionally, if you first Create a Diversion using Deception, 
taking a single Palm an Object or Steal an Object action doesn't 
end your unseen condition.
 SURVEY WILDLIFE FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Survival
You can spend 10 minutes assessing the area 
around you to find out what animals are nearby, based on 
nests, scat, and marks on vegetation. Attempt a Survival check 
against a DC determined by the GM. 
Success You identify one or two types of animals that live in 
the environment, and you find tracks you can follow if you 
want to seek one out. If you have the master proficiency 
rank in Survival, you can also identify one type of more 
intelligent and dangerous beast in the environment.
Critical Success
 You identify three or four types of animals 
that live in the environment, and you find tracks you 
can follow if you want to seek one out. If you have the 
master proficiency rank in Survival, you can also identify 
one type of more intelligent and dangerous beast in 
the environment.
SWIFT SNEAK FEAT 7
 Prerequisites
 master in StealthYou can move your full Speed when you Sneak. 
You can use Swift Sneak while Burrowing, Climbing, Flying, or 
Swimming instead of Striding if you have the corresponding 
movement type.
TERRAIN STALKER FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in StealthSelect one type of difficult terrain from the 
following list: underbrush, reeds, rubble, or snow. While unseen 
by all non-allies in that type of terrain, you can Sneak without 
the need to attempt a Stealth check as long as you move no 
more than 5 feet and are not within 10 feet of an enemy at any 
point during your movement. 
Special You can select this feat multiple times. Each time, 
choose a different type of terrain.
TOUGHNESS FEAT 1
 You can withstand more punishment than most 
before going down. Increase your maximum Hit Points by your 
GeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneral173level or 4, whichever is higher. When you reach level 5 and 
every time you gain a level thereafter, adjust your maximum 
Hit Points gained from Toughness accordingly (for example, at 
level 7, this feat would increase your maximum Hit Points by 7). 
You also gain a +1 circumstance bonus to recovery saves (see 
page 295).TRAIN ANIMAL FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Nature
You spend time to teach an animal to act in a 
particular way, selected from those listed in the 
Command an Animal action (see page 153). The 
GM determines the DC of any check required to do so and the 
amount of time the training takes (usually at least a week). If 
you're expert, master, or legendary in Nature, you might be able 
to train more exotic creatures, at the GM's discretion.
Success The animal learns the trick. Failure
 The animal doesn't learn the trick.
 TRICK MAGIC ITEM FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, 
or Religion
You examine a magic item you would normally 
not be able to use—for example, a fighter normally couldn't 
use a scroll, staff, or wand—in an effort to fool the item and 
activate it temporarily. Attempt a check with a skill DC of the 
item's level (typically the low-difficulty DC, but the GM could 
adjust this at their discretion), using the skill that matches the 
item's magic tradition (Arcana for a spell on the arcane spell 
list, Nature for a primal spell, Occultism for an occult spell, 
and Religion for a divine spell). You must have identified the 
magic item (or had it identified for you) in order to activate 
it this way. If you activate a magic item that requires your 
spell roll or spell DC and you don't have the ability to cast 
spells of the relevant type (such as arcane or divine), you have 
the untrained proficiency rank and can use the highest of 
your Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma modifiers. If you're 
a master in the appropriate skill for that magical tradition, 
you're treated as having the trained proficiency rank instead. 
If the spell's tradition depends on the caster's class or requires 
her to have the spell on her spell list, you choose which class 
you're attempting to emulate.
Success You can spend actions to activate the item as if you 
could normally use it as long as you do so before the end 
of your turn. 
Failure
 You can't use the item for the remainder of your 
turn, but you can try again on subsequent turns.
Critical Failure
 You can't use the item, and can't try to use it 
again until you next prepare.
UNDERWATER MARAUDER FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Athletics
You've learned to fight underwater like an aquatic 
native. You are not flat-footed while you are in water, and 
you don't take the usual penalties for using a bludgeoning or 
slashing melee weapon in water.
Downtime
GeneralManipulate
SkillGeneralManipulate
SkillGeneralSkillUNMISTAKABLE LORE FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Lore
You never get information wrong when it comes 
to your narrow areas of expertise. When you Recall Knowledge 
for any Lore subcategory in which you're trained, you treat a 
critical failure as a failure.
VIRTUOSIC PERFORMER FEAT 1
 Prerequisites
 trained in Performance
You have exceptional talent with one type of 
performance. You gain a +2 circumstance bonus when making 
a certain type of performance. Select one of the following 
specialties and apply the bonus when attempting Performance 
checks of that type. If it's unclear whether the specialty applies, 
the GM decides. SpecialtyExamplesActing
Drama, pantomime, puppetryComedyBufioonery, joke-telling, limericks
DanceBallet, huara, jig, macruKeyboards
Harpsichord, organ, piano
Oratory
Epic, ode, poetry, storytelling
Percussion
Chimes, drum, gong, xylophoneSingingBallad, chant, melody, rhyming
StringsFiddle, harp, lute, violWindsBagpipe, flute, recorder, trumpet
WALL JUMP FEAT 7
 Prerequisites
 master in Athletics
If you're adjacent to a wall at the end of a jump 
(whether performing a High Jump, Long Jump, or Leap), you 
don't fall as long as your next action is another jump. Your 
previous jump counts as moving on the ground before your 
second jump, provided you moved at least 10 feet. You can wall 
jump only once in a turn, unless you're legendary in Athletics, 
in which case you can wall jump as many times as you can use 
consecutive jump actions in that turn.
WARY DISARMAMENT FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 expert in Thievery
If you trigger a device or set ofi a trap while 
disarming it, you gain a +2 circumstance bonus to your AC or 
saving throw against the device or trap. This applies only to 
attacks or effects triggered by your failed attempt, not to any 
later ones, such as additional attacks from a complex trap.
WEAPON PROFICIENCY FEAT 1
 You gain the trained proficiency rank in all simple 
weapons. If you were already trained in all simple weapons, 
you become trained in all martial weapons. If you were already 
trained in all martial weapons, you become trained in one exotic 
weapon of your choice.
Special You can select this feat more than once, each time 
you select it, you become trained in additional weapons as 
appropriate (first all simple weapons, then all martial weapons, 
then one exotic weapon each additional time).
GeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneralSkillGeneral174 Your character starts out with 150 silver pieces (sp) to 
spend on any common items from this chapter. Items 
with an uncommon rarity can only be bought with special 
access or GM permission. If you're playing a spellcaster 
and want to buy magic items (like potions, scrolls, or holy 
water) or an alchemist and want to buy alchemical items, 
your GM can give you permission to buy those, and she 
will tell you which items you can choose from and how 
much they cost. Once you've purchased your starting items, there are 
three main ways to gain new items and equipment: you 
can find them during an adventure, make them with the 
Crafting skill, or purchase them from a merchant. COINS AND CURRENCY
Though you might be able to barter valuable items in some areas, currency is the most versatile way to make transactions when you head to market. The most common currency is coin. For most commoners and beginning 
adventurers, the standard unit is the silver piece (sp). Each silver piece is of a standard weight of silver and is typically accepted by any merchant or kingdom no matter where it was minted. There are three other types of common coins, each likewise standardized in weight and value. The first is the copper piece (cp). Each copper piece is worth one-tenth of a silver piece. The gold piece (gp) is often used for purchasing magic items and other expensive items, as 1
 gold piece is worth 10 silver pieces 
or 100 copper pieces. The platinum piece (pp) is used by nobles to demonstrate their wealth, for the purchase of very expensive items, or simply as a way to easily transport large sums of currency. A platinum piece is 
worth 10 gold pieces, 100 silver pieces, or 1,000 copper pieces. See Table 6–1: Coin Values for the exchange rates 
of common types of coins. 
COIN BULK
Coins are popular due to their portability. A thousand coins 
of any denomination or combination of denominations 
count as 1 Bulk (see below). It's not usually necessary to 
determine the Bulk of coins in fractions of 1,000. In other 
words, 100 coins don't count as a light item, and 1,999 
coins count as 1 Bulk, not 2. 
To make your mark on the world, you'll need to have the right equipment, 
including armor, weapons, and other gear. This chapter presents the various 
equipment that you can purchase during character creation and can usually 
purchase in most cities and other large settlements.
PRICEMost items in the following tables have a Price, which is 
the amount of currency it typically takes to purchase that 
item. However, some of the items listed have an inherent 
or otherwise meaningless cost, indicated with "—". This 
typically indicates that an entry can't be purchased. An 
item with a "0" Price indicates that it is normally free, 
but its value could be higher based on its quality or the 
composition of its materials. Most items can be sold for 
half their Price, but coins and raw materials (such as 
crafting components) can be exchanged for their full Price. ITEM LEVELEach item has an item level, which represents the complexity 
of the item and any magic used in its construction. Simpler 
items with a lower level are easier to construct, and you 
can't Craft items that have a higher level than your own (see 
page 148). If an item's level isn't listed, its level is 0. While 
characters can use items of any level, Game Masters should 
keep in mind that allowing characters access to items far 
above their current level may imbalance the game. CARRYING AND USING ITEMS
A character typically has two hands, allowing her to hold an 
item in each hand or a single two-handed item using both 
hands. Drawing or changing how you're carrying an item 
usually requires an Interact action (dropping items instead 
uses the Drop action). Table 6–2: Changing Equipment 
lists some ways that you might change the items you're 
holding or carrying, and the number of hands you need 
to do so. Many ways to use items cost multiple actions. 
For example, drinking a potion stowed in your belt pouch 
requires drawing it with an Interact action and drinking it 
with an Operate Activation action (see page 376).BULK
Especially heavy or unwieldy items can make it more 
difficult for you to move swiftly, as can overloading yourself 
with too much gear. The Bulk value of an item reflects how 
difficult an item is to handle, representing both weight and 
the size of the item. In most cases, you don't need to worry 
about Bulk unless you're carrying numerous substantial 
items or you have a low Strength score. EQUIPMENT
175 Bulk LimitYou can carry an amount of Bulk equal to 5 plus your 
Strength modifier without penalty; if you carry more, you 
gain the encumbered condition. You can't hold or carry 
more Bulk than 10 plus your Strength modifier.
Encumbered
If you're encumbered, decrease your Speed by 10 feet, to 
a minimum of 5 feet. This applies to every movement type 
you have. You also increase your armor's check penalty by 
2, or take a –2 check penalty if you're unarmored. Bulk Values
Items may have a number to indicate their Bulk value, or may be light (indicated by an L) or negligible for the purpose of determining Bulk (indicated by a —). 
For instance, full plate armor is 4 Bulk, a longsword is 1 Bulk, a dagger or scroll is light, and a piece of chalk is negligible. Ten light items count as 1 Bulk, and you don't 
count fractions (so 9 light items count as 0, and 11 items count as 1). Items of negligible Bulk don't count toward 
Bulk unless you try to carry vast numbers of them, as determined by the GM. Estimating an Item's Bulk
As a general rule, an item that weighs 5 to 10 pounds is 1 Bulk, an item weighing less than a few ounces is negligible, and anything in between is light. Particularly 
awkward or unwieldy items might have different Bulk values. A 10-foot pole isn't heavy, but its length makes 
it difficult for you to move while you have one on your person. Items made for larger or smaller creatures have greater or lesser Bulk, as described on page 191.
DONNING AND REMOVING ARMOR
Donning and removing armor are both activities involving 
many Interact actions. It takes 1 minute to don light 
armor, 5 minutes to don medium or heavy armor, and 
1 minute to remove any armor. 
WIELDING ITEMS
Some abilities require you to wield an item, typically a 
weapon. You're wielding an item any time you're holding 
it in the number of hands needed to use it effectively. 
You're not just carrying the weapon around—you're ready 
to use it. Other abilities might require you to merely carry 
or have an item. These apply as long as you have the item 
on your person; you don't have to be wielding it.
ITEM DAMAGE
An item can be destroyed if it takes damage enough times. 
An item reduces any damage dealt to it by its Hardness. 
The Hardness of various materials is explained in the 
Materials section on page 354. If an item takes damage 
equal to or exceeding the item's Hardness, the item takes 
a Dent. If the item takes damage equal to or greater than 
TABLE 6–1: COIN VALUES
Exchange Rate
CPSPGPPPCopper piece (cp)11/101/1001/1,000 Silver piece (sp)
1011/101/100 Gold piece (gp)
1001011/10 Platinum piece (pp)
1,000100101twice its Hardness in one hit, it takes 2 Dents. For instance, 
a wooden shield (Hardness 3) that takes 10
 damage would 
take 2 Dents. A typical item can take only 1 Dent without 
becoming broken. A second Dent causes it to become 
broken, though it can still be repaired. An item that would 
take a Dent or become broken while already broken is 
destroyed beyond salvage. Some magical or especially 
sturdy items can take more than 1 Dent before becoming 
broken, as noted in their descriptions. BROKEN
Broken is a condition that affects objects. A broken object 
can't be used for its normal function, nor does it grant 
bonuses. It still imposes all penalties normally incurred 
by carrying, holding, or wearing it. For example, a suit of 
armor would still impose its Dexterity modifier cap, check 
penalty, and so forth.
Broken armor is an exception. It still grants its item bonuses, but also gives you a conditional penalty to AC depending on its category: –1 for broken light armor, –2 
for broken medium armor, or –3 for broken heavy armor.
OBJECT IMMUNITIES
 Inanimate objects and traps with object immunities 
are always immune to bleed, disease, death effects, 
healing, mental effects, necromancy, nonlethal attacks, 
and poison, as well as the asleep, enervated, enfeebled, 
paralyzed, and stunned conditions. Many objects 
are immune to most other conditions, at the GM's 
discretion. For instance, a sword can't be hampered, but 
some effects that cause the hampered condition might 
work on a moving blade trap. Intelligent items are not 
immune to mental effects. TABLE 6—6: CHANGING EQUIPMENT
ChangeHandsDraw, stow, or pick up an item
11 or 2 Pass an item to or from a willing creature
21 or 2 Drop item to the ground
1 or 2 Detach a shield or item strapped to you
1 Change grip on an item2 Retrieve item from a backpack
3 or satchel
21 If you retrieve a two-handed item with only one hand, you still 
need to change your grip before you can wield or use it.
2 A creature must have a hand free for someone to pass an item to 
them, and they might need to change their grip if they receive an 
item requiring two hands to wield or use.
3 Retrieving an item stowed in your own backpack requires 
detaching the backpack first with a separate Interact action.
176 Armor increases your defenses, but some medium or heavy 
armor can hamper your movement. If you want to increase 
your defense beyond the protection your armor provides, 
you can use a shield. Armor always protects you while 
you're wearing it, but you have to spend an action to Raise 
a Shield in order for it to improve your AC for that round. ARMOR CLASSYour 
Armor Class (AC) measures how well you can defend 
against attacks. Your 
Touch Armor Class (TAC)
 protects 
against attacks that need only to touch you. 
Your Armor Class equals 10 plus your Dexterity modifier 
(up to your armor's Dexterity modifier cap) plus your 
proficiency modifier for any armor or shield you are using 
plus the armor's item bonus to AC. If you're using both 
armor and a shield, apply the lower of the two proficiency 
modifiers. If you're not wearing armor, substitute your 
proficiency in unarmored defense. Your Touch Armor Class
 uses the same calculation, except you add your armor's item 
bonus to TAC instead of its bonus to AC. Some spells, magic 
item, and abilities give your character a bonus or penalty to 
AC. These also apply to TAC unless stated otherwise.
ARMOR STATISTICS
Table 6–3: Armor lists all suits of armor that can be 
purchased (as well as the statistics for wearing no armor), 
organized by armor type. The columns in the table provide the following statistics. 
AC 
BONUS AND TAC 
BONUS
These numbers are the item bonuses you add to your Armor Class and Touch Armor Class, respectively.
DEXTERITY MODIFIER CAP
This number is the maximum amount of your Dexterity modifier that can apply to your AC and TAC while you 
are wearing a given suit of armor. For example, if you 
have a Dexterity modifier of +4 and you are wearing a suit of half plate, the amount of your Dexterity modifier 
you apply to your AC and TAC while wearing that armor 
is capped at +2. CHECK PENALTY
You take this untyped penalty to Strength-, Dexterity-, 
and Constitution-based skill checks, except for those 
that have the attack trait. Armor that is better than 
standard quality has a lower check penalty, as described 
on page 190.TABLE 6—6: ARMOR
Unarmored
PriceAC Bonus
TAC Bonus
Dex Modifier Cap
Check Penalty
Speed Penalty
BulkTraits
No armor—+0+0—————Light ArmorPriceAC Bonus
TAC Bonus 
Dex Modifier Cap
Check Penalty
Speed Penalty
BulkTraits
Padded armor2 sp+1+0+5——LFragile
Leather
15 sp+1+0+6——1—Studded leather
30 sp+2+0+5–1—1—Chain shirt45 sp+2+1+5–1—2 NoisyMedium ArmorPriceAC Bonus
TAC Bonus 
Dex Modifier Cap
Check Penalty
Speed Penalty
BulkTraits
Hide20 sp+3+0+4–3—2—Scale mail35 sp+3+1+4–2–5 ft.
2—Chain mail60 sp+4+1+3–3–5 ft.
2 NoisyBreastplate
80 sp+4+2+3–4–5 ft.
2 ClumsyHeavy Armor
PriceAC Bonus
TAC Bonus 
Dex Modifier Cap
Check Penalty
Speed Penalty
BulkTraits
Splint mail125 sp+5+2+2–3–10 ft.
3 ClumsyHalf plate
175 sp+5+2+2–4–10 ft.
3—Full plate (level 2)
300 sp+6+2+1–5–10 ft.
4 ClumsyShieldPriceAC Bonus
TAC Bonus
Dex Modifier Cap
Check Penalty
Speed Penalty
BulkTraits
Light wooden shield
5 sp+1*+1*—–1—L—Light steel shield10 sp+1*+1*—–1—L—Heavy wooden shield
10 sp+2*+2*—–1—1—Heavy steel shield
20 sp+2*+2*—–1—1—* Gaining a shield's circumstance bonus to AC and TAC requires using the Raise a Shield action. A shield's check penalty applies whenever 
you're holding the shield, regardless of whether you have it raised to gain its bonus.
ARMOR AND SHIELDS
177 SPEE
D PENALTY
While wearing a suit of armor, your Speed is reduced by 
the listed amount, to a minimum of 5 feet. This applies to 
all your Speeds in any movement types you have, such as 
a climb Speed or swim Speed, as well as your land Speed. 
BULK
This entry assumes you're wearing the armor and 
distributing its weight across your body. A carried suit of 
armor usually has 1 more Bulk (or 1 Bulk total for armor 
of light Bulk). This adjusted Bulk is increased or decreased 
for armor of nonstandard sizes following the normal rules 
(see page 191).ARMOR TRAITS
The traits for each suit of armor appear in this entry. 
Armor can have the following traits. Clumsy This armor's Dexterity modifier cap also applies to Reflex 
saves and to all Dexterity-based skill and ability checks that 
don't have the attack trait.
Fragile
 If fragile armor takes a Dent, it's automatically broken.
Noisy This armor's check penalty increases by 1 on Stealth checks.
SHIEL
DSA shield requires the use of one of your hands. It grants its 
bonuses to AC and TAC only if you use an action to Raise 
a Shield. This grants the shield's bonuses to AC and TAC 
as a circumstance bonus until your next turn starts. The 
shield's check penalty applies whenever you're wielding 
the shield, regardless of whether the shield is raised. While you have a shield raised, you can use the Shield 
Block reaction to reduce damage you take by the shield's 
Hardness (3 for wooden shields or 5 for steel). 
ATTACKING WITH A SHIELD
If you attack with a shield, treat it like an attack with 
an improvised weapon (see page 178). This deals the 
heavy shield bash damage or light shield bash damage 
(as appropriate to the shield's type) listed on Table 6–5: 
Martial Melee Weapons on page 180.
If you want to reliably use your shield to attack, you need to buy and attach a shield boss or shield spikes to the shield. These work like other weapons, and can even be etched with runes (see page 370).MATERIALS
Most suits of armor and weapons are made from ordinary, 
commonly available materials like iron, leather, steel, and wood.
Some special materials have inherent supernatural properties, 
such as cold iron, which harms fey, or silver, which can damage 
werewolves and other lycanthropic creatures. These materials 
are detailed on page 354.
178 Most characters in Pathfinder likely carry some kind 
of weapon, whether a keen-edged dagger, a mighty 
warhammer, a graceful bow, or even a simple club. 
Full details on how you calculate your bonuses, penalties, 
and modifiers for attack rolls and damage rolls are given 
in Chapter 1 on page 17, but they are summarized here. ATTACK ROLLS
When making an attack, determine the result of your attack roll by rolling a d20 and adding your attack modifier with the weapon or unarmed attack you're using. Your melee attack modifier is the sum of your proficiency 
modifier with a weapon plus your Strength modifier (or optionally, your Dexterity modifier for weapons with 
the finesse trait). Your ranged attack modifier is the sum 
of your proficiency modifier with a weapon plus your Dexterity modifier. Bonuses and penalties apply to these 
rolls just like with other types of checks. Magic weapons 
and weapons of expert quality or better add an item bonus to your attack rolls. MULTIPLE ATTACK PENALTY
If you attack more than once on the same turn, your 
attacks after the first take a penalty called a multiple 
attack penalty. Your second attack takes a –5 penalty, and 
any subsequent attacks take a –10 penalty. This penalty is 
untyped and is cumulative with all other penalties. The penalty doesn't apply to attacks you take when it 
isn't your turn (such as attacks made as part of a reaction), 
though these attacks often have their own penalty. You 
can choose a weapon with the agile trait to reduce your 
multiple attack penalty (see page 182).UNARMED ATTACKS
You can Strike with your fist or another body part, 
calculating your attack and damage rolls in the same way 
you would with a weapon. This counts as a simple weapon, 
so almost all characters start out trained in unarmed 
attacks. Use the statistics for a fist even if you're kicking, 
kneeing, or attacking with another part of your body. 
Some ancestry feats, class features, class feats, and spells 
give access to special, more powerful unarmed attacks. DAMAGE ROLLS
When the result of your attack roll with a weapon or 
unarmed attack is equal to or exceeds your target's AC, 
roll the weapon or unarmed attack's damage die to 
determine the damage you deal. If you're making a melee 
attack, you add your Strength modifier to the damage. 
Ranged weapons usually use only the weapon's damage 
die, though weapons with the propulsive trait sometimes 
add half your Strength modifier, and thrown weapons add 
your full Strength modifier.
Magic weapons add one or more weapon damage dice 
to your damage roll. These extra dice are the same die size 
as the weapon's damage die.
CRITICAL HITS
When you make an attack and roll a natural 20 (the 
number on the die is 20), or if the result of your attack 
exceeds the target's AC by 10, this is called a critical 
success (also known as a critical hit). 
If you critically succeed at a Strike, your attack deals 
double damage (see page 293). This damage doubling 
applies only on Strikes. Other attacks, such as spells or 
some uses of the Athletics skill, describe the specific effects 
that occur when their outcomes are critical successes. IMPROVISED WEAPONS
If you attack with something that wasn't built to be a 
weapon, such as a chair or a vase, you're making an attack 
with an improvised weapon. Treat it as a simple weapon 
of poor quality (regardless of its actual quality). The GM 
determines the amount and type of damage the attack 
deals, if any, as well as any weapon traits the improvised 
weapon should have. Many improvised weapons have the 
nonlethal trait. SELECTING WEAPONSCharacters who focus on combat need to carefully consider 
their choice of weapons, evaluating whether they want 
to fight in melee or at range, damage potential, and the 
special features of various weapons. Characters who are 
primarily spellcasters usually just need to pick a backup 
weapon in the best category they're proficient with. When selecting weapons, you should start by identifying the weapon types that you have proficiency in. You should then compare weapons within these types 
to determine which ones you will have the highest melee 
or ranged attack modifier with. It's usually considered 
best practice to select both a melee and ranged weapon during character creation so you can contend with a broader variety of foes. WEAPON STATISTICS
The tables on pages 180–182 list the statistics for various 
melee and ranged weapons that you can purchase, as well 
as the statistics for striking with a fist. The tables include 
the following weapon statistics. All weapons listed in this 
chapter are considered to have an item level of 0.DAMAGE
This entry lists the weapon's damage die and the type of 
damage it deals: B for bludgeoning, P for piercing, or S 
for slashing. RANGE
Ranged and thrown weapons have a range increment, 
indicated here in feet. Attacks with the weapon work 
WEAPONS179normally up to that distance. Attacks beyond the weapon's 
range increment take a –2 penalty for each additional 
multiple beyond. For example, a shortbow takes no 
penalty against a target up to 60 feet away, a –2 penalty 
against a target beyond 60 feet but up to 120 feet away, 
and a –4 penalty against a target beyond 120 feet but up 
to 180 feet away, and so on. Attacks that would take a 
penalty greater than –10 due to range are impossible. RELOA
DRanged weapons indicate how many Interact actions it 
takes to reload them. This can be 0 if drawing ammunition 
and firing the weapon are part of the same action. If an 
item takes 2 or more actions to reload, the GM determines 
whether you can spend those actions out of sequence or if 
they must be performed together as an activity.
An item with an entry of "—" must be drawn to be 
thrown, which usually takes an Interact action just like 
drawing any other weapon. Reloading and drawing 
a thrown weapon both require a free hand. When you 
spend the last action required to reload a weapon you're 
holding, as part of that action, you can place your hands 
in the grip necessary to wield the weapon normally.
AMMUNITION
Some entries in the ranged weapons tables are followed 
by an entry indicating the type of ammunition that 
weapon shoots. Because other relevant statistics vary by 
weapon, ammunition entries list only the name, quantity, 
Price, and Bulk. HAN
DSSome weapons require one hand to use, and others 
require two. A few items, such as a bow, list 1+ for its 
hands entry. You can hold such a weapon in one hand, but 
the process of shooting it requires using another hand to 
retrieve, prepare, and shoot a piece of ammunition. This 
means you can do other things with your other hand while 
holding the bow in one hand without spending an action 
to change your grip, but you must free up your other hand 
in order to shoot. For example, you could shoot an arrow 
with your first action, use an Interact action to open a 
door with your second action, then shoot another arrow 
COUNTING WEAPON DAMAGE DICE
effects based on a weapon's number of damage dice (such as 
charge or forceful) include only the weapon's damage die plus 
any extra dice for a 
magic weapon
. They don't count additional 
dice from abilities, critical specialization effects, property runes, 
weapon traits, or the like. On a critical hit, you double this bonus 
only once; you don't double it again due to the number of damage 
dice increasing.
180 TABLE 6—6: SIMPLE MELEE WEAPONS
Weapon
PriceDamageBulkHandsGroup
Weapon Traits
Club0 sp1d6 B11 ClubThrown 10 ft. 
Dagger2 sp1d4 PL1 KnifeAgile, finesse, thrown 10 ft., versatile S
Fist—1d4 B—1 Brawling
Agile, finesse, nonlethal, unarmedGauntlet2 sp1d4 BL1 Brawling
Agile, free-hand
Light mace4 sp1d4 BL1 ClubAgile, finesse, shove
Longspear
5 sp1d8 P22 SpearReach
Mace12 sp1d6 B11 ClubShove
Morningstar10 sp1d6 B11 ClubVersatile P
Sickle2 sp1d4 SL1 KnifeAgile, finesse, tripSpear1 sp1d6 P11 SpearThrown 20 ft.
Spiked gauntlet3 sp1d4 PL1 Brawling
Agile, free-hand
Stafi0 sp1d4 B11 ClubTwo-hand d8
TABLE 6—6: MARTIAL MELEE WEAPONS
Weapon
PriceDamageBulkHandsGroup
Weapon Traits
Bastard sword
35 sp1d8 P11 Sword
Two-hand d12
Battle axe
12 sp1d8 S11 Axe
Sweep
Bo stafi2 sp1d8 B12 ClubMonk, parry, reach, trip
Falchion
30 sp1d10 S12 Sword
Forceful, sweep
Flail8 sp1d6 B11 FlailDisarm, sweep, trip
Glaive
10 sp1d8 S22 Polearm
Deadly d8, forceful, reach
Greataxe
22 sp1d12 S22 Axe
Sweep
Greatclub
12 sp1d10 B22 ClubBackswing, shove
Greatpick
14 sp1d10 P22 PickFatal d12
Greatsword
20 sp1d12 S22 Sword
Versatile P
Guisarme14 sp1d10 S22 Polearm
Reach, trip
Halberd
18 sp1d10 P22 Polearm
Reach, versatile S
Hatchet
4 sp1d6 SL1 Axe
Agile, sweep, thrown 10 ft.
Heavy shield bash
—1d4 B—1 Shield—Heavy shield boss
5 sp1d6 B—1 ShieldAttached to heavy shield
Heavy shield spikes
5 sp1d6 P—1 ShieldAttached to heavy shield
Lance12 sp1d8 P22 SpearCharge, deadly d8, reach
Light hammer3 sp1d6 BL1 HammerAgile, thrown 20 ft. 
Light pick4 sp1d4 PL1 PickAgile, fatal d8
Light shield bash—1d3 B—1 ShieldAgileLight shield boss4 sp1d4 B—1 ShieldAgile, attached to light shield
Light shield spikes4 sp1d4 P—1 ShieldAgile, attached to light shield
Longsword
10 sp1d8 S11 Sword
Versatile P
Main–gauche5 sp1d4 PL1 KnifeAgile, disarm, finesse, parry, versatile S
Maul26 sp1d12 B22 HammerShove
Pick7 sp1d6 P11 PickFatal d10
Ranseur14 sp1d10 P22 Polearm
Disarm, reach
Rapier15 sp1d6 P11 Sword
Deadly d8, disarm, finesseSap1 sp1d6 BL1 ClubAgile, nonlethalScimitar11 sp1d6 S11 Sword
Forceful, sweep
Scythe18 sp1d10 S22 Polearm
Deadly d10, tripShortsword
9 sp1d6 PL1 Sword
Agile, finesse, versatile S
Starknife24 sp
1d4 PL1 KnifeAgile, deadly d6, finesse, thrown 20 ft., 
versatile S
Trident
13 sp1d8 P11 SpearThrown 20 ft.
War flail
15 sp1d10 B22 FlailDisarm, sweep, trip
Warhammer
12 sp1d8 B11 HammerShove
Whip1 sp1d4 S11 FlailDisarm, finesse, nonlethal, reach, trip
181 TABLE 6—6: SIMPLE RANGED WEAPONS
Weapon
PriceDamageRangeReload
BulkHandsGroup
Weapon Traits
Blowgun
1 sp1 P20 ft.1 L1 DartAgile, nonlethal10 blowgun darts
5 cpLCrossbow
30 sp1d8 P120 ft.112 Bow
—10 bolts1 spLDart1 cp1d4 P20 ft.—L1 DartAgile, thrown
Hand crossbow
25 sp1d6 P60 ft.1 L1 Bow
—10 bolts1 spLHeavy crossbow
40 sp1d10 P120 ft.222 Bow
—10 bolts1 spLJavelin
1 sp1d6 P30 ft.—L1 DartThrown 
Sling0 sp1d6 B50 ft.1 L1+SlingPropulsive
10 sling bullets1 cpLTABLE 6—6: MARTIAL RANGED WEAPONS
Weapon
PriceDamageRangeReload
BulkHandsGroup
Weapon Traits
Composite longbow
200 sp1d8 P100 ft.021+Bow
Deadly d10, propulsive, volley 50
10 arrows
1 spLComposite shortbow
140 sp1d6 P60 ft.011+Bow
Deadly d10, propulsive
10 arrows
1 spLLongbow
60 sp1d8 P100 ft.021+Bow
Deadly d10, volley 50
10 arrows
1 spLShortbow
30 sp1d6 P60 ft.011+Bow
Deadly d1010 arrows
1 spLTABLE 6—6: UNCOMMON SIMPLE MELEE WEAPONS
Weapon
PriceDamageBulkHandsGroup
Weapon Traits
Clan dagger25 sp1d4 PL1 KnifeAgile, dwarf, parry, versatile B
Katar
3 sp1d4 PL1 KnifeAgile, deadly d6, monkTABLE 6—6: UNCOMMON MARTIAL MELEE WEAPONS
Weapon
PriceDamageBulkHandsGroup
Weapon Traits
Dogslicer1 sp1d6 SL1 Sword
Agile, backstabber, finesse, goblin
Elven curve blade
38 sp1d8 S22 Sword
Elf, finesse, forceful
Filcher's fork
11 sp1d4 PL1 SpearAgile, backstabber, deadly d6, finesse, 
halfling, thrown 20 ft.
Gnome hooked hammer18 sp1d6 B11 HammerGnome, trip, two-hand d10, versatile P
Horsechopper9 sp1d8 S22 Polearm
Goblin, reach, trip, versatile P
Kama10 sp1d6 SL1 KnifeAgile, monk, tripKatana
20 sp1d8 S11 Sword
Versatile P
Kukri
6 sp1d6 SL1 KnifeAgile, finesse, tripNunchaku2 sp1d6 BL1 ClubBackswing, disarm, finesse, monkOrc knuckle dagger
7 sp1d6 PL1 KnifeAgile, disarm, orc
Sai6 sp1d4 PL1 KnifeAgile, disarm, finesse, monk, versatile B
Spiked chain28 sp1d8 S12 FlailDisarm, finesse, tripTemple sword
14 sp1d8 S11 Sword
Monk, tripTABLE 6—6: UNCOMMON EXOTIC MELEE WEAPONS
Weapon
PriceDamageBulkHandsGroup
Weapon Traits
Dwarven waraxe
25 sp1d8 S21 Axe
Dwarf, sweep, two-hand d12
Gnome flickmace24 sp
1d8 B21 FlailGnome, reach
Orc necksplitter
21 sp1d8 S11 KnifeForceful, orc, versatile P
Sawtooth sabre
50 sp1d6 SL1 Sword
Agile, finesse, twin182 TABLE 6—6: UNCOMMON MARTIAL RANGED WEAPONS
Weapon
PriceDamageRangeReload
BulkHandsGroup
Weapon Traits
Halfling sling stafi50 sp1d10 B80 ft.112 SlingHalfling, propulsive
10 sling bullets1 cpLShuriken1 cp1d4 P20 ft.0—1 DartAgile, monk, thrown 
with your third action. You're considered to be wielding 
a 1+ weapon as long as you're holding it in one hand and 
also have a hand free. Weapons that require two hands typically deal more 
damage. Some weapons that use one hand have the 
two-hand trait, causing them to deal a different weapon 
damage die when used in two hands. In addition, some abilities require you to be wielding a 
weapon in two hands. You meet this requirement as long 
as you hold the weapon in two hands, even if it doesn't 
actually require two hands or have the two-hand trait. GROUP
A weapon's group classifies it with similar types of 
weapons. This affects what the weapon does on a critical 
hit if you have the ability to use critical specialization 
effects, and some abilities reference weapon groups. WEAPON
 TRAITS
The traits a weapon has appear in this entry. Weapons can 
have the following traits. 
Agile The multiple attack penalty you take on the second attack 
each turn with this weapon is –4 instead of –5, and –8 instead 
of –10 on the third and subsequent attacks in the turn.
Attached
 An attached weapon must be combined with another 
piece of gear in order to be used. The trait lists what type of 
item the weapon must be attached to. You must be wielding or 
wearing the item the weapon is attached to in order to attack 
with it. For example, shield spikes are attached to a shield, 
allowing you to attack with the spikes instead of a shield bash, 
but only if you're wielding the shield. An attached weapon is 
usually bolted onto or built into the item it's attached to, and 
typically an item can have only one weapon attached to it. An 
attached weapon can be removed from one item and attached 
to another with successful use of the Crafting skill. If an item is destroyed, its attached weapon can usually be salvaged.
Backstabber When you hit a flat-footed creature, this weapon 
deals 1 precision damage. The damage increases to 2 if the 
weapon is master quality or to 3 if it's legendary.
Backswing You can use this weapon's momentum from a miss 
to lead into your next attack. After missing with this weapon 
on your turn, you gain a +1 circumstance bonus to your next 
attack with this weapon before the end of your turn.
Charge If you moved at least 10 feet on the action before your 
attack, add a circumstance bonus to damage for that attack 
equal to the number of damage dice for the weapon.
Deadly On a critical hit, the weapon adds a weapon damage die of 
the listed size. This damage increases to two dice if the weapon 
is master quality and three dice if the weapon is legendary. 
For
 instance, a master-quality rapier deals 2d6 additional 
piercing damage on a critical hit.
Disarm You can use this weapon to Disarm with the Athletics skill 
even if you don't have a free hand. This uses the weapon's reach 
(if different from your own) and adds the weapon's item bonus 
to attack rolls (if any) as a bonus to the Athletics check. If you 
critically fail a check to Disarm using the weapon, you can drop 
the weapon to treat it as a normal failure. On a critical success, 
you still need a free hand if you want to take the item.
Dwarf
 People of the dwarf ancestry craft and use these weapons.
Elf People of the elf ancestry craft and use these weapons.
Fatal
 The fatal trait includes a die size. On a critical hit, all the 
weapon's damage dice increase to that die size instead of the 
normal dice, plus the weapon adds another die of damage of 
the listed size.
Finesse You can use your Dexterity modifier instead of your 
Strength modifier when making attack rolls with this melee 
weapon. You still use Strength when calculating damage.
Forceful
 This weapon becomes more dangerous when you build 
up momentum. When you attack with it more than once on 
your turn, the second attack adds a circumstance bonus to 
damage equal to the number of weapon damage dice, and each 
subsequent attack adds a circumstance bonus to damage equal 
to double the number of weapon damage dice.
 Free-Hand
 This weapon doesn't take up your hand, usually 
because it is built into your armor. A free-hand weapon can't 
be Disarmed. You can use the hand covered by your free-hand 
weapon to wield other items, perform manipulate actions, and 
so forth. You can't attack with a free-hand weapon if you're 
wielding anything in that hand or using the hand for something 
else. When you're not wielding anything and not using the 
hand, you can use abilities that require you to have a hand free 
as well as those that require you to be wielding a weapon in 
that hand. Each of your hands can have only one free-hand 
weapon on it.
Gnome People of the gnome ancestry craft and use these weapons.
Goblin People of the goblin ancestry craft and use these weapons.
Halfling People of the halfling ancestry craft and use these 
weapons.
Monk Monks can use these weapons with their abilities that 
normally require unarmed attacks.
Nonlethal All attacks with this weapon are nonlethal (see page 
294), and are used to knock creatures unconscious instead of 
kill them. Orc
 People of the orc ancestry craft and use these weapons.
Parry This weapon can be used defensively to block attacks. While 
wielding this weapon, you can spend an action to position your 
weapon defensively, gaining a +1 circumstance bonus to AC 
until the start of your next turn.
183 Propulsive
 You add half your Strength modifier to damage rolls 
with a propulsive ranged weapon so long as your Strength 
modifier is not negative. If you have a negative Strength 
modifier, you add your full Strength modifier instead.
Reach
 This weapon is long and can be used to attack creatures 
up to 10 feet away instead of only adjacent creatures. For 
creatures that already have reach with the limb or limbs that 
wield the weapon, the weapon increases their reach by 5 feet.
Shove
 You can use this weapon to Shove with the Athletics skill 
even if you don't have a free hand. This uses the weapon's reach 
(if different from your own) and adds the weapon's item bonus 
to attack rolls (if any) as a bonus to the Athletics check. If you 
critically fail a check to Shove using the weapon, you can drop 
the weapon to treat the outcome as a normal failure. 
Sweep
 This weapon makes wide sweeping or spinning attacks, 
making it easier to attack multiple enemies. When you attack 
with this weapon, you gain a +1 circumstance bonus to your 
attack roll if you already attempted an attack this turn against 
a creature other than the target of this attack.
Thrown
 You can throw this weapon as a ranged attack. A thrown 
weapon adds your Strength modifier to damage just like a 
melee weapon does. When this trait appears on a melee 
weapon, it also includes the range increment in feet. Ranged 
weapons with this trait use the range increment specified in 
the weapon's range
 entry. 
Trip
 You can use this weapon to Trip with the Athletics skill even 
if you don't have a free hand. This uses the weapon's reach (if 
different from your own) and adds the weapon's item bonus 
to attack rolls (if any) as a bonus to the Athletics check. If you 
critically fail a check to Trip using the weapon, you can drop the 
weapon to treat the outcome as a normal failure.
Twin
 These weapons are used as a pair, each complementing the 
other. When you are wielding two of the same weapon with 
this trait and attack with one of them, if you already attacked 
with the other weapon this turn, you add a circumstance bonus 
to the damage roll equal to the weapon's number of damage 
dice. For instance, if you attacked with a twin weapon in your 
right hand with your first action, you would gain this bonus 
to damage when you attack with a matching twin weapon in 
your left hand for your second action. On your third action, 
an attack with either weapon would receive this bonus, since 
you'd already attacked with both. The weapons must be of the 
same type to benefit from this trait, but they don't need to be 
the same quality or have the same runes.
Two-Hand
 This weapon can be wielded with two hands. Doing so 
changes its weapon damage die to the indicated value. If this 
trait applies to a magic weapon, the extra weapon damage dice 
from it being a 
magic weapon
 also increase in size while it's 
being wielded with two hands.
Unarmed An unarmed attack uses your body rather than a 
manufactured weapon. An unarmed attack isn't a weapon, 
though it's categorized with weapons for weapon tables and 
weapon groups, and it might have weapon traits. Because it's 
a part of your body, an unarmed attack can't be Disarmed. It 
also doesn't take up a hand, though a fist or other grasping 
appendage follows the same rules as a free-hand weapon.
Versatile
 A versatile weapon can be used to deal a different type 
of damage than the type listed in the damage entry. This trait 
indicates the alternate damage type. For instance, a piercing 
weapon that has versatile S can be used to deal piercing or 
slashing damage. You choose the damage type each time you 
make an attack.
Volley
 This ranged weapon is less efiective at close distances. 
Your attacks against targets that are at a distance within the 
number of feet listed take a –2 penalty. 
CRITICAL SPECIALIZATION EFFECTS
Certain ancestry feats, class features, feats, weapon runes, and other abilities can grant you additional benefits 
when you achieve a critical success on an attack roll with certain weapons. This is called a critical specialization effect. The exact effect depends on which weapon group your weapon belongs to, as listed below. You can always 
decide not to add the critical specialization effect of your weapon. If an effect requires a saving throw or check, use your class DC. Axe
 Choose one creature adjacent to the initial target and within 
reach. If its AC is lower than your attack roll for the critical 
hit, you deal damage to that creature equal to a roll of your 
weapon's damage die (including extra dice for its potency 
rune, if any). No bonuses or other additional dice apply to 
this damage. Bow
 If the target of the critical hit is adjacent to a surface, 
it gets stuck to that surface by the missile. The target is 
immobile and must spend an Interact action to attempt a 
DC 10 Athletics check to pull the missile free before it can 
move from its space. The creature doesn't become stuck if it's 
incorporeal, liquid (like a water elemental or some oozes), or 
could otherwise escape without efiort. Brawling
 The target must succeed at a Fortitude save or be 
slowed 1 until the end of your next turn.
Club You knock the target back from you 5 or 10 feet (you choose 
the distance). Dart The target takes 1d4 persistent bleed damage. You gain an 
item bonus to this bleed damage equal to the weapon's item 
bonus to attack rolls.
Flail The target is knocked prone.
Hammer The target is knocked prone.
Knife The target takes 1d4 persistent bleed damage. You gain an 
item bonus to this bleed damage equal to the weapon's item 
bonus to attack rolls.
Pick The weapon viciously pierces the target. The target takes 
1 additional damage per weapon damage die (including the 
extra dice from a critical hit).
Polearm
 The target is moved 5 feet in a direction of your choice.
Shield You knock the target back from you 5 feet.
Sling The target must succeed at a Fortitude save or become 
slowed 1 for 1 round.
Spear The weapon pierces the target, weakening its attacks. The 
target is enfeebled 1 for 1 round.
Sword
 The target is made ofi-balance by your attack, becoming 
flat-footed for 1 round.
184 You need all sorts of items both while exploring and in 
downtime, from rations to climbing gear to fancy clothing. GEAR STATISTICS
Entries for gear use the following categories. Any name 
with a number after it in parentheses indicates that the 
item's Price is for the indicated quantity. All items listed in 
this chapter are level 0 unless the item name is followed by 
a higher item level in parentheses. PRICEThis is the Price to buy this item from a merchant. 
BULK
This measures how heavy and cumbersome the item is to 
carry. Containers can hold the listed amount of bulk, but 
some items might not fit due to their dimensions. See page 
174 for more information regarding Bulk. 
HAN
DSThis lists how many hands it takes to wield the item 
effectively. Most items that require two hands can be 
carried in only one hand, but you must spend an Interact 
action to change your grip in order to use the item. The 
GM may determine that an item is too big to carry in one 
hand (or even two hands, for particularly large items).
ADVENTURING GEAR DESCRIPTIONS
These items follow special rules or require more detail. 
ALCHEMIST'S TOOLS
These beakers and chemicals can be used to set up a mobile 
alchemical laboratory. Expert-quality alchemist's tools give 
a +1 item bonus to Crafting checks to create alchemical 
items, and master-quality ones give a +2 item bonus.
ARTISAN'S TOOLS
You can create items from raw materials using artisan's 
tools. This involves using the Crafting skill to Craft the items. Expert artisan's tools give you a +1 item bonus to 
the check, and master tools give you a +2 item bonus. Different sets might be needed for different kinds of work, as determined by the GM; for example, blacksmith's tools 
differ from woodworker's tools. 
BACKPACK 
A backpack can hold up to 4 Bulk worth of items. If you 
are carrying or stowing a backpack rather than wearing it 
on your back, it has light Bulk instead of negligible. 
BASIC CRAFTER'S BOOK
 This book contains the formulas (see page 188) for all the 
common items in this chapter.
BELT POUCH 
A belt pouch can hold up to 4 items of light Bulk. 
CALTROPS
 These four-pronged metal spikes can cause damage to 
a creature's feet. You can scatter caltrops in an empty 
square adjacent to you with an Interact action. The first 
creature that moves into that square must succeed at a DC 
14 Acrobatics check or take 1d4 piercing damage and 1 
persistent bleed damage. A creature taking bleed damage 
from caltrops is hampered 5. Spending an Interact action 
to pluck the caltrops free reduces the DC to stop the 
bleeding. Once a creature takes damage from caltrops, 
enough caltrops are ruined that other creatures moving 
into the square are safe. Deployed caltrops can be salvaged to be used again if 
no creatures took damage from them. Otherwise, enough 
caltrops are ruined that they can't be salvaged.
CANDLE
 A lit candle sheds dim light in a 5-foot radius. 
 CHEST
 A wooden chest can hold up to 8 Bulk worth of items. 
 CLIMBING KIT
This satchel includes 50 feet of hemp rope, some pulleys, a dozen pitons, a hammer, a grappling hook, and one set 
of crampons. Climbing kits allow you to attach yourself to the wall you're climbing, moving half as quickly as usual (minimum 5 feet) but letting you attempt a DC 5 
flat check whenever you critically fail to prevent a fall. You gain a +1 item bonus to Athletics checks to Climb 
while utilizing an expert climbing kit. A single kit has only enough materials for one climber; each climber 
needs their own kit. 
CLOTHING
 Ordinary clothing is functional and decently tailored, such as peasant garb, monk's robes, traveler's attire, or work 
clothes. Fine clothing suits a noble or royal, made with expensive fabrics, precious metals, and intricate patterns. Winter clothing grants a +1 item bonus to Survival checks 
to Survive in the Wild when enduring cold.
COMPASS
 A compass gives you a +1 item bonus to Survival checks 
to navigate, provided you're in a location with uniform 
magnetic fields. 
CROWBAR, EXPERT
This item grants you a +1 item bonus to Athletics checks 
to Break Open anything that can be pried open. 
DISGUISE KIT
 This small wooden box contains cosmetics, false facial 
GEAR185 TABLE 6—6: ADVENTURING GEAR
ItemPriceBulkHandsAlchemist's tools
 60 sp22 Expert alchemist's tools (level 2)
250 sp 22 Master alchemist's tools (level 7)
3,750 sp 
22 Artisan's tools
50 sp82 Expert artisan's tools (level 2)
200 sp82 Master artisan's tools (level 7)
3,000 sp82 Backpack1 sp——Basic crafter's book
1 spL2 Bedroll
1 cpL—Belt pouch4 cp——Caltrops
3 spL1 Candle (10)1 cp—1 Chain (10 feet)40 sp12 Chalk (10)1 cp—1 Chest6 sp22 Climbing kit5 sp12 Expert climbing kit (level 2)
150 sp12 ClothingOrdinary
1 sp——Fine20 sp——Winter4 sp——Compass10 sp—1 Cookware
10 sp22 Crowbar, expert (level 2)
5 spL2 Disguise kit20 spL2 Replacement cosmetics
1 sp——Expert kit (level 2)
150 spL2 Expert cosmetics (level 2)
5 sp——Master kit (level 7)
2,500 spL2 Master cosmetics (level 7)
50 sp——Fishing tackle8 sp12 Expert fishing tackle (level 2)
150 sp12 Flint and steel5 cp—2 Formula book (blank)
10 sp11 Grappling hook1 spL1 Hammer1 spL1 Healer's tools
50 sp12 Expert healer's tools (level 2)
200 sp12 Holly and mistletoe0—1 Hourglass25 spL1 Ladder (10-foot)3 cp32 LanternBull's-eye
10 sp11 Hooded7 spL1 Lock
20 sp—2 Expert lock (level 2)
100 sp—2 Master lock (level 7)
1,500 sp—2 Magnifying glass, expert
200 sp—1 Manacles30 sp—2 Expert manacles (level 2)
150 sp—2 Master manacles (level 7)
2,250 sp—2 Material component pouch
5 spL1 Merchant's scale
2 spL2 Mirror
10 sp—1 ItemPriceBulkHandsMug1 cp—1 Musical instrumentHandheld8 sp12 Handheld expert (level 2)
250 sp12 Handheld master (level 7)
3,600 sp 12 Heavy
16 sp162 Heavy expert (level 2)
500 sp 162 Heavy master (level 7)
7,200 sp 
162 Oil (1 pint)1 cp—2 Piton1 cp—1 Rations (1 day)
5 cpL1 Religious symbol
Wooden
1 spL1 Silver
20 spL1 Religious text
10 spL1 Repair kit
30 sp12 Expert repair kit (level 2)
150 sp12 Rope
Hemp (50 feet)1 sp12 Silk (50 feet)10 spL2 Sack (5)1 cpL1 Saddlebags2 spL2 Satchel
1 sp—2 Scroll case
1 sp—2 Sheath
1 cp——Signal whistle8 cp—1 Snare kit
50 sp82 Expert snare kit (level 2)
200 sp82 Master snare kit (level 7)
3,000 sp82 Spellbook (blank)10 sp11 Spyglass
200 spL2 Expert spyglass (level 4)
800 sp L2 Tack
40 sp1—Ten-foot pole
1 cp12 Tent
Pup8 spL2 Four-person
50 sp12 Pavilion (level 2)
400 sp 122THieves' tools
30 spL2 Replacement picks
6 sp——Expert tools (level 2)
250 sp L2 Expert picks (level 2)
50 sp ——Master tools (level 7)
3,600 spL2 Master picks (level 7)
720 sp ——Tool
Long tool
12 sp12 Short tool4 spL1 or 2 Torch (10)
1 cpL1 Vial5 cp—1 Waterskin
5 cpL1 Writing set15 spL2 Extra ink and paper1 sp——186hair, spirit gum, and a few simple wigs. You usually need 
a disguise kit to set up a disguise in order to Impersonate 
someone using the Deception skill. A disguise kit of expert 
quality adds a +1 item bonus to relevant checks, and a 
master disguise kit adds a +2 item bonus. If you've crafted 
a large number of disguises, you can replenish your 
cosmetics supply with replacement cosmetics of a level of 
quality that matches that of your disguise kit. FISHING
 TACKLE
 This kit include a collapsible fishing pole, fishhooks, 
line, lures, and a fishing net. Expert-quality fishing tackle 
grants a +1 item bonus to checks to fish. 
FLINT AND STEEL
 Flint and steel are useful in creating a fire if you have the time to catch a spark, though using them is typically too time-consuming to be possible during an encounter. Even 
in ideal conditions, using flint and steel to light a flame requires at least 3 actions, and often significantly longer.
FORMULA BOOK
 A formula book holds formulas necessary to make items other than the common equipment from this chapter. 
Each formula book can hold the formulas for up to 100 different items. Formulas can also appear on parchment sheets, tablets, and almost any other medium, and there's 
no need for you to copy them into a specific book as long as you can reference them. HEALE
R'S TOOLS
 This kit of bandages, herbs, and suturing tools is necessary 
for Medicine checks to Administer First Aid, Treat a 
Disease, or Treat a Poison. Expert-quality healer's tools 
provide a +1 item bonus to such checks. 
HOLLY AND MISTLETOE
 Plants of supernatural significance provide a divine focus 
for some primal spellcasters, such as druids, to use certain 
abilities and cast some spells. A bundle of holly and 
mistletoe must be held in one hand to use it. LANTE
RN A lantern sheds bright light and requires 1 pint of oil to 
function for 6 hours. A bull's-eye lantern emits its light in 
a 60-foot cone. A hooded lantern sheds light in a 30-foot 
radius and is equipped with shutters, which you can 
close to block the light. Closing or opening the shutters 
takes an Interact action and requires you to have one 
hand free. LOCK Picking a standard lock requires three successful DC 20 
Thievery checks. An expert-quality lock requires four 
successes at DC 25, and a master lock requires five 
successes at DC 30.
MAGNIFYING GLASS, EXPERT
This handheld lens gives you a +1 item bonus to Perception 
checks to notice minute details of documents, fabric, and 
the like. 
MANACLES
 Binding a creature in manacles requires one successful 
touch attack to bind each wrist or ankle. A creature is 
normally untrained with manacle touch attacks. A two-
legged creature with its legs bound is hampered 15, and a 
two-handed creature with its wrists bound has to succeed 
at a DC 5 flat check any time it uses a manipulate action 
or else that action fails. A creature bound to a stationary 
object is immobile. For creatures with more or fewer limbs, 
the GM determines what effect manacles have, if any. 
 Freeing a creature from manacles requires three successful 
DC 22THievery checks to Pick the Lock. Expert-quality 
manacles require four successes at DC 27, and master-
quality manacles require five successes at DC 32.
MATERIAL COMPONENT POUCH 
This pouch contains material components for those spells that require them. Though the components are used up over time, you can refill spent components during your 
daily preparations. 
MUSICAL INSTRUMENT
 Handheld instruments include bagpipes, a small set 
of chimes, small drums, fiddles and viols, flutes and 
recorders, small harps, lutes, trumpets, and similar-sized 
instruments. The GM might rule that an especially large 
handheld instrument (like a tuba) has greater Bulk. Heavy 
instruments such as large drums, a full set of chimes, and 
keyboard instruments are less portable, and generally 
need to be stationary while played. An expert instrument 
gives a +1 item bonus to Performance checks using that 
instrument, and a master instrument gives a +2 item bonus. 
OIL
 You can use oil to fuel lanterns, but you can also set a 
pint of oil aflame and throw it. You must first spend 
an Interact action preparing the oil, then throw it with 
another action as a ranged touch attack. If you hit, it 
splatters on the creature or in a single 5-foot square you 
target. You must succeed at a DC 10 flat check for the oil 
to ignite successfully when it hits. If the oil ignites, the 
target takes 1d6 fire damage. PITON
 These small spikes can be used as anchors to make climbing 
easier. To affix a piton, you must hold it in one hand and 
use a hammer to drive it in with your other hand. 
RELIGIOUS SYMBOL
 This piece of wood or silver is emblazoned with an 
image representing a deity. Some divine spellcasters, such 
187as clerics, can use a religious symbol of their deity as a 
divine focus to use certain abilities and cast some spells. A 
religious symbol must be held in one hand to use it. 
RELIGIOUS TEXT
 This manuscript contains scripture of a particular religion. 
Some divine spellcasters, such as clerics, can use a religious 
text as a divine focus to use certain abilities and cast some 
spells. A religious text must be held in one hand to use it. 
REPAIR KIT
 A repair kit allows you to perform simple repairs while 
traveling. It contains a portable anvil, tongs, woodworking 
tools, a whetstone, and oils for conditioning leather and 
wood. You can use a repair kit to Repair items using the 
Crafting skill. An expert repair kit gives you a +1 item 
bonus to the check. SACK A sack can hold up to 8 Bulk worth of items. A sack 
containing 2 Bulk or less can be worn on the body, usually 
tucked into a belt. You can carry a sack with one hand, 
but you must use two hands to transfer items in and out. SADD
LE
BAGS
 Saddlebags come in a pair. Each can hold up to 3 Bulk 
worth of items. The Bulk value given is for saddlebags 
worn by a mount. If you are carrying or stowing 
saddlebags, they counts as 1 Bulk instead of light Bulk. 
SATCHEL
 A satchel can hold up to 2 Bulk worth of items. If you are 
carrying or stowing a satchel rather than wearing it over 
your shoulder, it counts as light Bulk instead of negligible.
SCROLL CASE
 Scrolls, maps, and other rolled documents are stored in 
scroll cases for safe transport. 
SHEATH
 A sheath or scabbard lets you easily carry a weapon on 
your person. 
SIGNAL WHISTLE
 When sounded, a signal whistle can be heard clearly up to 
half a mile away in open country.
SNARE KIT
 This kit contains tools and ingredients for creating snares. 
A snare kit allows you to Craft snares using the Crafting 
skill. An expert snare kit gives you a +1 item bonus to the 
check and a master kit gives you a +2 item bonus. 
SPELLBOOK
 A spellbook holds the written knowledge necessary to 
learn and prepare various spells, a necessity for wizards 
and a useful luxury for other spellcasters looking to 
discover additional spells. Each spellbook can hold up to 
100 spells. The Price listed is for a blank spellbook. SPYGLASS
A typical spyglass lets you see things eight times farther than normal. A spyglass of expert quality adds a +1 item bonus to Perception checks to notice details at a distance. TACK Tack includes all the gear required to outfit a riding 
animal, including a saddle, bit and bridle, and stirrups 
if necessary. Especially large or oddly shaped animals 
might require specialty saddles. These can be more 
expensive or hard to find, as determined by the GM. 
The Bulk value given is for worn tack. If carried, the 
Bulk increases to 2.
TEN-FOOT POLE
 When wielding this long pole, you can use Seek to search 
a square up to 10 feet away. The pole is not sturdy enough 
to use as a weapon. 
THIEVES' TOOLS
 You need thieves' tools to Pick Locks or Disable Devices 
(of some types) using the Thievery skill. Thieves' tools of expert quality add a +1 item bonus to checks to Pick Locks and Disable Devices, and master thieves' tools 
add a +2 item bonus. Replacement picks are necessary when your tools break as a result of a critical failure on a Thievery check. TOOL
 This entry is a catchall for basic hand tools that don't 
have a specific adventuring purpose. A hoe, shovel, or sledgehammer is a long tool, and a hand drill, ice hook, or trowel is a short tool. A tool can usually be used as an improvised weapon, dealing 1d4 damage for a short tool or 1d6 for a long tool. The GM determines the damage type that's appropriate or adjusts the damage if needed.
TORC
HA torch sheds bright light in a 20-foot radius. It can be 
used as an improvised weapon that deals 1d4 bludgeoning 
damage plus 1 fire damage. VIAL
 A simple glass vial holds up to 1 ounce of liquid. 
WRITING SET
 Using a writing set, you can draft correspondence and 
scribe scrolls. A set includes stationery, including a 
variety of paper and parchment, as well as ink, a quill or 
inkpen, sealing wax, and a simple seal. If you've written 
a large amount, you can refill your kit with extra ink 
and paper.
188 TABLE 6—6: FORMULAS
Item Level
Formula Price
1st10 sp2nd18 sp3rd
30 sp4th50 sp5th80 sp6th125 sp7th180 sp8th250 sp9th350 sp10th500 sp11th700 sp12th1,000 sp13th1,500 sp14th2,250 sp15th3,250 sp16th5,000 sp17th7,500 sp
18th12,000 sp19th20,000 sp20th35,000 spTABLE 6—6: SERVICES
ItemPriceBulkHandsBeverages
Mug of ale1 cpL1 Keg of ale
2 sp22 Pot of cofiee or tea
2 cpL1 Bottle of wine1 spL1 Bottle of fine wine10 spL1 Courier1 cp per mileHireling (1 day)
Unskilled1 spSkilled5 spLodging (1 day)
Floor space3 cpBed (for 1)1 spPrivate room (for 2)
8 spExtravagant suite (for 6)
100 spMealPoor meal
1 cpL2 Square meal
3 cpL2 Fine dining10 spL2STabling (1 day)
2 cpToll
1 cp+Transportation (per 5 miles)
Caravan
3 cpCarriage2 spFerry or riverboat
4 cpSailing ship6 cpTABLE 6—6: COST OF LIVING
ItemWeek
MonthYear
Subsistence*
4 sp20 sp240 sp
Comfortable14 sp60 sp720 spFine300 sp1,300 sp16,000 spExtravagant
1,000 sp4,300 sp52,000 sp* You can Survive in the Wild or Subsist in the Streets for free.
TABLE 6—6: SPELLCASTING SERVICES
ItemPrice1st-level spell
27 sp*
2nd-level spell
72 sp*
3rd-level spell
180 sp*
4th-level spell
400 sp*
5th-level spell
800 sp*
6th-level spell
1,600 sp*
7th-level spell
3,600 sp*
8th-level spell
7,200 sp*
9th-level spell
18,000 sp*
* Plus any cost required to cast the specific spell
FORMULASFormulas are instructions that can be used to Craft items, 
typically kept in a formula book. You can usually read a 
formula as long as you can read the language the formula is 
written in, though you might lack the skill to Craft the item. 
Often, alchemists and crafting guilds use obscure languages 
or create codes to protect their formulas from rivals. You can buy common formulas at the listed Price, or 
hire an NPC to show you their formula book for the same 
Price. A purchased formula is typically a schematic on 
rolled-up parchment of light Bulk. You can copy a formula 
into your formula book in 1 hour, either from a schematic 
or directly from someone else's formula book. If you have 
a formula, you can make a copy at minimal cost, but you 
can't Craft a formula using the Crafting skill. If you can 
find them at all, formulas for uncommon items and rare 
items are usually significantly more valuable. 
ITEMS WITH MULTIPLE VERSIONS
If an item has multiple versions of different levels, you 
need the formula for each version. For example, if you 
have the formula for a 
type I bag of holding, you need 
to acquire a separate formula to be able to Craft a 
type 
II bag of holding. The GM might determine that you can 
acquire a different version more easily or at a lower Price. 
REVERSE-ENGINEERING FORMULAS
If you have an item, you can attempt to reverse-engineer 
its formula. This uses the Craft activity, and takes the same 
amount of time as creating the item from a formula. You 
must disassemble the item during the base downtime. The 
item's disassembled parts are worth half its Price in raw 
materials and can't be reassembled unless you successfully 
reverse-engineer the formula or acquire the formula 
another way. Reassembling the item from the formula 
works just like Crafting it from scratch. After the base downtime, you attempt a Crafting check 
against the same DC it would take to Craft the item. If 
you succeed, you Craft the formula at its Price (and can 
189keep working to reduce the Price as normal). If you fail, 
you're left with raw materials and no formula. If you 
critically fail, you also waste 10% of the raw materials 
you'd normally be able to salvage. SERVICES
The services listed on Table 6–14 describe expenditures 
for services and consumables, such as staying at an inn or 
having someone work for you. HIRELING
Paid laborers can provide services for you. Unskilled 
hirelings can do simple grunt work, and are untrained 
using most skills. Skilled hirelings have expert proficiency 
in a particular skill. Hirelings are level 0. If a skill check 
is needed, an untrained hireling has a +0 modifier, while a 
skilled hireling has a +4 modifier in their area of expertise 
and +0 for other skill checks. Hirelings' rates double if 
they're going adventuring with you, and they hide from 
danger rather than fighting on your behalf. 
TRANSPORTATION
The costs to hire transportation include standard travel 
with no amenities. Most transit services provide basic 
sleeping arrangements, and some provide meals at the 
rates listed on Table 6–14. Arranging transportation into 
dangerous lands can be more expensive or impossible. 
SPELLCASTING
Spellcasting services, listed on Table 6–16, are uncommon. 
Having a spell cast on your behalf requires finding a 
spellcaster who knows that spell and is willing to cast it 
to your specifications. It can be hard to find someone who 
can cast higher-level spells, and uncommon or rare spells 
typically cost 50–100% more, if you can find someone 
who knows them at all. Spells that take a long time to cast 
(over 1 minute) usually cost 25% more. You must pay any 
cost listed in the spell in addition to the Price on the table. 
COST OF LIVINGTable 6–15 shows how much it costs to get by for various 
amounts of downtime. This covers room and board, dues, 
taxes, and other fees. ANIMALSPrices are listed for both renting an animal for a task or trip 
and purchasing one outright. You usually need to pay for 
rentals up front, and if the seller believes the animal might 
be in danger, they typically require a deposit equal to the 
Price of the animal. Most animals panic in battle. When 
combat begins, a mount becomes frightened 4 and has the 
fleeing condition as long as it's frightened. If you successfully 
Handle your Animal using Nature (see page 153), you can 
keep it from fleeing, though this doesn't remove its frightened 
condition. If the animal is attacked or damaged, it returns to 
frightened 4 and is fleeing, with the same exceptions. TABLE 6—6: ANIMALS
ItemPriceDogRent guard dog
1 cp per day*
Purchase guard dog
2 spRent riding dog
6 cp per day*
Purchase riding dog
40 spHorseRent riding horse
1 sp per day*
Purchase riding horse
80 spRent warhorse
10 sp per day*
Purchase warhorse (level 2)
300 sp Pack animalRent pack animal
2 cp per day*
Purchase pack animal
20 spPony
Rent riding pony
8 cp per day*
Purchase riding pony
65 spRent warpony
8 sp per day*
Purchase warpony (level 2)
240 sp
* Might require a deposit
TABLE 6—6: BARDING
Light Barding
PriceAC 
BonusTAC 
Bonus Check Penalty
Speed Penalty
BulkSmall or Medium100 sp+1+0–1–5 ft.
2 Large200 sp+1+0–1–5 ft.
4 Heavy 
Barding
PriceAC 
BonusTAC 
Bonus Check Penalty
Speed Penalty
BulkSmall or Medium (level 2)
250 sp +2+1–3–10 ft.
4 Large (level 3)
500 sp +2+1–3–10 ft.
8 Warhorses and warponies are trained for combat. They 
don't become frightened at the start of combat or when 
attacked or damaged. Statistics for all listed animals appear in the Pathfinder 
Playtest Bestiary. BARD
ING
You can purchase special armor for animals, called 
barding. Any animal is considered to be trained in light 
barding, and combat-trained animals are trained in heavy barding. The Price and Bulk of barding depend on the animal's size. Guard dogs are Small, riding dogs and 
ponies are Medium, and horses and pack animals are Large. For creatures of other sizes, adjust the numbers 
from the closest category as normal (see page 191). Unlike a suit of armor, barding doesn't have a Dexterity 
modifier cap. Barding can't have magic runes, though 
special magical barding might be available. Barding otherwise uses the same rules as armor.
190
The armor, weapons, and gear listed in this chapter are 
considered to be of standard quality unless otherwise 
noted, created by a crafter who is trained in the 
appropriate skill. Standard items do not impose a bonus 
or penalty on any attacks or checks using the item. You 
might encounter items of poor quality from time to time, 
and as you adventure you may find, craft, or purchase 
items crafted at a significantly higher quality.
POOR-QUALITY ITEMS
Improvised or of dubious make, poor-quality items 
are never available for purchase except for in the most 
desperate of communities, usually for half the Price of a 
standard item, though you can never sell them in any case. 
Attacks and checks using a poor-quality item take a –2 item 
penalty. This penalty also applies to the DCs of all checks 
that a poor-quality item applies to (such as AC with poor-
quality armor). A poor-quality suit of armor also worsens 
the armor's check penalty by 2. If a poor-quality item takes 
enough damage to gain a Dent, it is broken instead. 
EXPERT, MASTER, AND LEGENDARY ITEMS
Expert, master, and legendary items are of a superior 
quality and can be crafted only by characters with the 
respective proficiency rank in the Crafting skill. Expert-quality armor and weapons are 2nd-level items, except 
expert heavy armor, which is 3rd level. Master-quality 
armor and weapons are 7th-level items, and legendary-quality armor and weapons are 15th-level items. 
Item Bonus
Weapons and skill-boosting items of expert, master, and 
legendary quality add the listed item bonus to attack rolls 
with the weapon or skill checks using the item (see Table 
6–19). Higher-quality armor reduces its check penalty by 
an amount equal to the item bonus (so master-quality hide 
would have a –1 check penalty instead of the standard –3 
check penalty). As with other item bonuses, you apply only 
the higher item bonus from the item's quality or its magic.
Ammunition Quality
Weapons that shoot ammunition convey their bonuses 
and abilities onto their ammunition, so an attack roll using standard-quality ammunition and an expert-quality bow still gains a +1 item bonus. You can also purchase high-
quality ammunition—10 pieces of ammunition cost as 
much as a single weapon. Magic ammunition has special 
benefits, but attacking with high-quality nonmagical ammunition doesn't confer any special bonus or benefit, 
so using expert-quality ammunition with a standard bow does not provide any bonus to the attack roll. Other ItemsWhile most items can be purchased at a better quality level 
for an increased Price, few actually grant any benefit from 
this improvement. Those that offer a benefit for improved 
quality list their Price and bonuses in their description. A 
finely crafted jeweled lantern, for example, is no better 
at providing light than an ordinary lantern, even if it is 
worth 100 sp. Improving Quality
You can use the Craft downtime activity (see page 148) 
to improve the quality of an item up to your proficiency 
rank in the Crafting skill. For this purpose, the Price equals the difference in Price between the two qualities. Upgrading an expert-quality chain shirt to master quality, 
for example, uses a Price of 3,250 sp. This requires you 
to have master Crafting and to provide 1,625 sp worth of 
raw materials to start the process. Nonmagical items might decrease in quality over a long 
period of neglect or after extended use, but they can be 
restored in the same way as improving an item. Magic Items and QualityWeapons and armor must be expert quality or better to be 
made into a magic item. Quality determines the maximum 
bonus and number of properties the weapon or armor can 
have. The full rules for magic items begin on page 376.Magic items are always assumed to be the minimum 
level of quality for their bonus unless noted otherwise, 
and the quality cost is included in the item's Price. Rarely, 
an item will be of a higher quality than the bonus would 
indicate, with its Price increased by the difference in 
quality. A 
+1 legendary longsword, for example, would 
cost 64,650 sp more than an ordinary +1 longsword (which would normally be crafted at an expert level).Quality and Hardness
Structures and items made at a quality above the minimum 
for their material gain additional Hardness. Table 6–19 
lists the increased Hardness of an item of higher quality 
compared to a standard item. Structures, such as walls and 
doors, gain twice as much Hardness for higher quality, as 
shown on the table. TABLE 6—6: ITEM QUALITY
ItemItemWeapon
Light/MediumHeavy Armor
ShieldItemStructure
QualityBonusPriceArmor PricePricePriceHardness
Hardness
Expert+1350 sp350 sp500 sp300 sp+1+2 Master+23,600 sp3,600 sp3,600 sp3,000 sp+3+6 Legendary
+365,000 sp65,000 sp65,000 sp6,000 sp+6+12 ITEM QUALITY
191 ITEMS AND SIZES
ITEMS AND SIZES
The Bulk rules in this chapter are made for Small and 
Medium creatures, and similarly the items are sized for 
creatures of those sizes. Large or larger creatures can 
carry more, and Tiny creatures can carry less. Their Bulk 
limits are multiplied, as noted on the table below.
In most cases, the only creatures of sizes other than Small 
or Medium are monsters under the GM control, in which 
case you probably won't need to track Bulk carefully. 
These rules for Bulk limits mainly come up when a group 
tries to load up a mount or animal companion, and the 
rules for items of different sizes apply when the characters 
defeat a big creature that has gear, like a fire giant.
BULK CONVERSIONS FOR DIFFERENT SIZES
Creatures of different sizes count items of lower or higher 
Bulk in a similar way to how Small and Medium creatures 
count light items, as shown in the table. For example, a 
Large creature counts 10 items of 1 Bulk as 1 Bulk and 
a Huge creature counts 10 items of 2 Bulk as 1 Bulk. A 
Tiny creature counts 10 items of negligible Bulk as 1 Bulk. 
Negligible items work in a similar way—a Huge creature 
can carry any number of 1-Bulk items. A Tiny creature 
doesn't count any items as negligible Bulk.
Creature Size
Bulk LimitTreats as 
LightTreats as 
NegligibleTiny×1/2—noneSmall or MediumStandard
L—Large×21 BulkLHuge×42 Bulk1 BulkGargantuan×84 Bulk2 Bulk
ITEMS OF DIFFERENT SIZES
Creatures of sizes other than Small or Medium need items 
appropriate to their size. These items have different Bulk, 
and possibly a different Price. The table below provides 
the differences. Items that are always built for creatures 
of a certain size (such as the barding on page 189) already 
include any necessary adjustments. Creature 
Size
PriceBulkLight BecomesNegligible BecomesTinystandard
×1/2*——Small or Mediumstandard
standard
L—Large×2×21 LHuge×4×421 Gargantuan×8×842* An item that would have its Bulk reduced below 1 has light Bulk.
For example, a morningstar has a Price of 10 sp and 
1 Bulk, so one made for a Huge creature has a Price of 
40 sp and 4 Bulk. One made for a Tiny creature still 
costs 10 sp (due to its intricacy) and has 1/2 Bulk, which 
converts to light Bulk. A torch costs 1 cp and has light 
Bulk, so a torch made for a Huge creature costs 4 cp and 
has 2 Bulk, and one made for a Tiny creature costs 1 cp 
and has negligible Bulk. A Tiny creature or one that's Large or larger counts 
items of different Bulk in a special way, as described 
on above. This means these creatures can usually wear 
and carry about the same amount of gear as a Medium 
creature if the equipment is appropriately sized. The Price adjustment applies only to the Price of the item itself. Prices for magic items and alchemical items mostly come from 
their magic or alchemical properties. The Price 
of an item made from 
special materials is 
calculated based on 
the item's Bulk, after 
adjusting the Bulk 
for the item's size. 
See Chapter 11 for 
more  information.192 PREPARING SPELLS
If you're a prepared spellcaster, you must spend time 
once each day preparing your spells for that day. At the 
start of your daily preparations, you select a number of 
spells of different spell levels determined by your levels in a spellcasting class. You retain access to these spells 
until they are cast or until you prepare spells again. Each prepared spell is expended after a single casting, so if you want to cast a particular spell more than once in a 
day, you need to prepare that spell multiple times. The 
exception to this rule are spells with the cantrip trait; 
once you prepare such a spell, you can cast it as many times as you want until the next time you prepare spells. See page 193.You might gain an ability allowing you to swap 
prepared spells or perform other aspects of preparation 
throughout the day, but only your daily preparation 
counts for the purpose of effects that last "until the next 
time you prepare spells." 
HEIGHTENED PREPARED SPELLS
You can prepare a spell in a higher-level slot than its 
normal spell level. This is called heightening your spell. If 
you do this, the spell's level increases to match the higher 
level of the new spell slot. This can be useful because some 
effects, such as dispelling, depend on the spell's level.
 Many spells have specific extra benefits when they 
are heightened, such as increased damage. These extra benefits are described in a special entry at the end of the spell's stat block. Some heightened entries specify 
at what levels the spell can be prepared to gain these 
extra advantages. Each of these heightened entries states specifically what aspects of the spell change at the given level, including any effects of the lower-level heightened 
versions of the spell; you need to read only the heightened entry for the spell level you're casting. Other heightened entries give a number after a plus 
sign, indicating that heightening grants extra advantages 
over multiple levels. This effect applies for every level 
the spell is heightened above its lowest spell level, and is 
cumulative. For example, 
fireball says "
Heightened (+1)
 The damage increases by 2d6." Because fireball deals 6d6 
fire damage at level 3, a level 4 
fireball would deal 8d6 fire 
Whether from mystic artifacts, mysterious creatures, or wizards weaving 
strange spells, magic brings fantasy and wonder to the world of Pathfinder. 
This section describes how spellcasters prepare and cast spells.
damage, a 5th-level spell would deal 10d6 fire damage, 
and so on. SPONTANEOUS SPELLS
If you're a spontaneous spellcaster, you don't prepare 
spells in your spell slots. Instead, you choose which spell 
you're using a spell slot for at the moment you decide to 
cast it. The cost of this freedom and spontaneity is that 
you know only a limited number of spells, determined by 
your class. When you make your daily preparations, all 
your spell slots are refreshed. 
HEIGHTENED SPONTANEOUS SPELLS
If you're a spontaneous spellcaster, you can heighten spells 
much like prepared casters do. However, you must know 
a heightened spell at the specific level that you want to 
cast it. You can choose to learn a spell at more than a 
single level so that you can cast it with more resilience. For 
example, if you knew fireball as a 3rd-level spell and as a 
5th-level spell, you could cast it as a 3rd-level or 5th-level 
spell, but not as a 4th-level spell. Many spontaneous casting classes provide the ability 
to cast a limited number of spells as heightened versions 
even if you know the spell at only a single level, such as 
the spontaneous heightening class feature. INNATE SPELLS
There's a third way to cast spells that doesn't rely on you 
having levels in a spellcasting class. These innate spells 
are natural to your character, typically coming from your 
ancestry or a magic item rather than a class. The ability 
that gives you an innate spell tells you how often you can 
cast it—usually once per day—and what tradition of spell 
it is (arcane, divine, occult, or primal). Innate cantrips 
can be cast at will and are automatically heightened as 
normal for cantrips (see Cantrips below) unless otherwise 
specified. As with spontaneous spells, you refresh your 
castings of innate spells during your daily preparations. You're always trained at casting your innate spells 
even if you aren't otherwise trained in spells. If you 
have expert or better proficiency in spell rolls, apply this proficiency to your innate spells too. You use your 
Charisma modifier as your spellcasting ability modifier SPELLS193on innate spells unless a rule states otherwise. You can 
use the spellcasting actions required to cast your innate spells, even if you don't normally have access to them 
for casting other spells. Having an innate spell means you can cast it, even if it's not of a spell level you can 
normally cast. This is especially common with monsters, which might be able to cast innate spells far beyond what a spellcaster of the same level could use. You can't heighten innate spells, but some abilities that 
grant innate spells might give you the spell at a higher level 
than its base or occasionally change the level at which you 
cast the spell. An innate cantrip heightens with your level, 
and its spell level is half your level, rounded up. CANTRIPS
A cantrip is a special type of spell that you can master to 
a higher degree than you can other spells. A spell with the 
cantrip trait doesn't use spell slots—you can cast a cantrip 
at will, any number of times per day. 
You can't prepare a cantrip in a numbered spell slot. A 
cantrip is always automatically heightened to the highest 
level of spell you can cast in the class. This makes a cantrip a 
1st-level spell if you can cast 1st-level spells, a 2nd-level spell 
if you can cast 2nd-level spells, and so on. If you gain access 
to a cantrip but aren't normally a spellcaster, your cantrips 
automatically heightened to half your level, rounded up. POWERS
Powers are a special type of spell that you can learn only 
through special class features, rather than choosing them 
from a spell list. You can't prepare a power in a spell slot. 
Most characters who gain powers from a class feature cast 
them using Spell Points. The number of Spell Points you 
receive depends on the class, but it is typically a number 
equal to a particular ability modifier when you first gain 
access to a power, and this number goes up as you gain 
different new powers. You can cast a power any number 
of times provided you have the Spell Points to pay for it. You only have one pool of Spell Points, even if you get 
powers and Spell Points from multiple sources. You can 
spend these Spell Points on any of your powers, regardless 
of their source. To calculate the number of Spell Points 
you have, compare the different pools granted by each 
source and use the highest of these (usually the highest of 
the respective ability modifiers), then add any extra Spell 
Points you get from feats or other sources. 
SPELLCASTERS WITH POWERS
If you are a spellcaster, your powers are the same tradition 
of spell as the class that gave you the power, so a wizard's 
powers are arcane, a cleric's are divine, and a sorcerer's 
are determined by their bloodline. 
Like cantrips, powers automatically use the highest 
level of spell you can cast from the class that gave you the 
powers. Unlike a cantrip, a power has a minimum level. 
If you can't cast spells of that level from a class, you can't 
cast powers of that level granted by that class either, even 
if you somehow gain access to it.194 
NON-SPELLCASTERS WITH POWERS
If you get powers from a class that doesn't usually grant 
the ability to cast spells (for example, if you're a monk with the Ki Strike feat), the highest level of power you can cast is half your level, rounded up, and your powers are automatically heightened to this level. The ability that gives you your powers will also tell you the proficiency rank for your spell rolls and spell DCs, as well as the tradition of your powers (arcane, divine, occult, or primal). Though the ability to cast powers does not mean you become a spellcaster, you gain the ability to use the 
Cast a Spell activity as well as use any spellcasting actions necessary to cast your powers (see page 195), but only when casting those powers. MAGICAL TRADITIONS
Spellcasters cast spells from one of four different spell 
lists, each of which represents one magical tradition. The four magical traditions are arcane, divine, occult, and primal. The caster adds the tradition's trait to the spell 
when she casts it. Your class will determine which tradition of magic 
your spells use. In some cases, you might be able to cast spells from a different spell list, such as the spells a cleric gains from her domain. In these cases, the spell still uses your magic tradition rather than that of the spell list it normally comes from. Some types of magic, such as that of most magic items, 
don't belong to any one of the traditions alone. These 
have the magical trait instead of a tradition trait. SPELL SCHOOLSAll spells fall into one of the eight schools of magic. Each 
spell has the trait corresponding to its school. ABJURATION
Abjurations protect and ward. They create barriers that keep out attacks, effects, or even certain types of creatures. They also create effects that harm trespassers or banish interlopers. CONJURATION
Conjuration spells bring a creature or object from 
somewhere else (typically from another plane) to follow 
your commands or transport creatures via teleportation. 
DIVINATION
Divinations allow you to learn the secrets of the present, past, and future. They bestow fortune, grant 
you the ability to perceive remote locations, and reveal secret knowledge. 
ENCHANTMENT
Enchantments affect the minds and emotions of other 
creatures, sometimes to influence and control behavior, and 
other times to bolster them to greater heights of courage. 
EVOCATION
Evocations capture magical forces and then shape them to 
harm your foes or protect you allies. 
ILLUSION
Illusions create the semblance of something real, fooling 
the eyes, ears, and other senses. 
Disbelieving IllusionsSometimes illusions give a creature a chance to disbelieve 
the spell, allowing the creature to effectively ignore it. 
This usually happens when they Seek or otherwise spend 
actions to engage with the illusion, comparing the result 
of their Perception check (or another check or saving 
throw, at the GM's discretion) with the spell's DC. Mental 
illusions typically provide rules in the spell's description 
for disbelieving the effect (often a Will save). 
If the illusion is visual and a creature interacts with 
the illusion in a way that would prove that it is not what 
it seems, they may know that an illusion is present, but 
they cannot ignore it without successfully disbelieving 
the illusion. For instance, if a character is pushed through 
the illusion of a door, they will know that the door is an 
illusion, but they still cannot see through it. Even in the 
case where a visual illusion is disbelieved, it may, at the 
GM's discretion, block vision enough to grant concealment 
to those on the other side of such an illusion from the 
disbelieving creature. Disbelieving an illusion makes it 
and those things it blocks seem hazy and indistinct. NECROMANCY
These spells harness the power of life and death. They 
can sap life essence or sustain creatures with life-saving healing. 
TRANSMUTATION
These spells make alterations to or transform the physical 
form of a creature or object. 
SPELL TRAITS
Some spells and effects have traits, such as "mental" or "good." These traits tell you a little bit more about the spell and how it works, and you might find other rules that reference them. A creature might, for example, have a –2 circumstance penalty on saving throws against mental effects. Traits of the spell apply to the effect of the spell, not to 
the actions used to cast it. For example, the effect of the 
light spell has the light trait, but providing a Somatic or 
Material Casting action while casting it isn't a light effect.
Below is a glossary of a few of the traits you might see 
that have important rules attached to them. AUDITORY
 Auditory actions and effects rely on sound. An action with 
the auditory trait can only be successfully performed if the 
195creature using the action can speak or otherwise produce 
the required sounds. A spell or effect with the auditory trait 
has its effect only if the target can hear it. This is different 
from a sonic effect, which still affects targets who can't hear 
it (such as deaf targets) as long as the effect makes sound. 
MORPH
 Spells that slightly alter a creature's form have the morph 
trait. You can be affected by multiple morph spells at 
once, but if you morph the same body part more than 
once, the first morph effect is immediately dismissed. Your morph effects may also be dismissed if you are 
polymorphed and the polymorph effect invalidates or overrides your morph effect. For instance, a morph that sharpened your fingers into claws would be dismissed if you polymorphed into a form that lacked hands, and a morph that gave you wings would be dismissed if you polymorphed into a form that had wings of its own 
(however, if your new form lacked wings, you'd keep 
the wings from your morph). The GM determines which morph effects can be used together and which can't.
POLYMORPH
These effects transform the target into a new form. 
Neither a creature nor an object can be under the effect 
of more than one polymorph effect at a time. If a creature 
or object comes under the effect of a second polymorph 
effect, the second polymorph effect dispels the first one. 
Unless otherwise stated, these spells don't allow the target 
to take on the appearance of a specific creature, but rather 
just a generic creature of a general type or ancestry.
SUMMONED
 A creature called by way of a conjuration spell or effect 
gains the summoned trait. A summoned creature can't 
summon other creatures, create things of value, or cast 
spells that require an expensive material component 
or special focus. It can take only 2 actions on its turn, 
and can't take reactions. Otherwise, it uses the standard 
abilities for a creature of its kind. When you finish casting the spell and when you spend 
an action to Concentrate on the Spell, the summoned creature then takes its 2 actions. After its actions, you continue with the rest of your turn. You can direct a given 
summoned creature only once per turn; Concentrating on a Spell for a summoned monster more than once on the 
same turn doesn't give that monster any more actions. If 
you don't Concentrate on the Spell during your turn, the 
creature takes no actions, assuming it isn't dismissed due 
to the spell having a duration of concentration. Summoned creatures can be banished by various spells 
and effects and are automatically banished if reduced to 
0 Hit Points, or if the spell that calls them is dismissed. 
VISUAL
 A visual spell can affect only creatures that can see it. 
CASTING SPELLS
Casting a Spell is a special activity consisting of a 
combination of spellcasting actions. For the spellcasting 
classes in this book, these actions are Material Casting, 
Somatic Casting, and Verbal Casting, but other spellcasters 
might use different actions to cast their spells. 
CAST A SPELL
You Cast a Spell you know or have prepared. Casting a Spell is a 
special activity that takes a variable number of actions depending 
on the spell, as listed in each spell's stat block. You can spend those 
actions in any order you wish, provided you do so consecutively 
on a single turn. As soon as all spellcasting actions are complete, 
the spell efiect occurs. Some spells allow you take a spellcasting action as a reaction 
or free action. In this case, you Cast the Spell as a reaction or free 
action (as appropriate) instead of as an activity; such cases will be 
noted in the spell's stat block (for example, "
 Verbal Casting").
Some spells take minutes or hours to cast. The Cast a Spell activity for these spells includes a mix of the listed spellcasting 
actions, but it's not necessary to break down which one you're 
doing at a given time. You can't take other actions or reactions 
while casting such a spell, though at the GM's discretion, you 
might be able to speak a few sentences. As normal for the 
activity rules, you can't cast these types of longer spells in an 
encounter, and if combat breaks out while you're casting one, 
your spell is disrupted (see Disrupting Spells on page 196).
SPELLCASTING ACTIONS
The actions you take to Cast a Spell have the spellcasting 
trait, and the ones used in this book are listed below. Some 
classes modify the way these spellcasting actions work. 
As noted in Cast a Spell, some specific spells let you turn 
spellcasting actions into reactions or free actions. This is 
indicated by a different symbol in the "Casting" entry of 
the spell in question. 
MATERIAL CASTING
Requirements 
You have a free hand.
You retrieve and manipulate either a material spell 
component or a spell focus. If you manipulate a material spell 
component, that component is expended in the casting (whether 
or not the spell is disrupted). If you manipulate a focus, it is not 
spent, and you can stow it again as part of this action if you so 
choose. Spells that require this action use a material component 
unless a focus is specifled. You can assume that common components are included in a 
material component pouch (see page 186), but spells that require 
foci list what items they need, and you might need to acquire 
them separately.
Special If you're a bard Casting a Spell from the occult tradition 
while holding a musical instrument, you can play that instrument 
to replace any material component the spell requires by using 
the instrument as a spell focus instead. In this case, you don't 
have to have a free hand to take this action and the action gains 
the auditory trait. Manipulate
Spellcasting196 If you're a cleric Casting a Spell from the divine tradition while 
holding a divine focus (such as a religious symbol or text), you can 
replace any material component the spell requires by using the 
divine focus as a spell focus instead. In this case, you don't have to 
have a free hand to take this action.
If you're a druid Casting a Spell from the primal tradition while 
holding a primal focus (such as holly and mistletoe), you can 
replace any material component the spell requires by using the 
primal focus as a spell focus instead. In this case, you don't have 
to have a free hand to take this action.
If you're a sorcerer Casting a Spell from the spell list that 
matches your bloodline, you can draw on the magic within 
your blood to replace any Material Casting actions that require 
material components with Somatic Casting actions. You can't 
replace a Material Casting action that requires a spell focus.
 SOMATIC CASTING 
Requirements 
You have a free hand.
You gesture and move to manipulate the forces 
of magic, providing a somatic component for a spell. If the spell 
requires you to touch the target, you do that as a part of this action. 
Special If you're a bard Casting an occult Spell while holding a 
musical instrument, you can play that instrument to replace any 
Somatic Casting actions with Material Casting actions by using 
the instrument as a spell focus instead. In this case, the Material 
Casting actions gain the auditory trait. If you're a cleric Casting a Spell from the divine tradition while 
holding a divine focus (such as a religious symbol or text), you 
don't have to have a free hand to take this action, and you can 
touch the target with the focus instead. If you're a druid Casting a Spell from the primal tradition while 
holding a primal focus (such as holly and mistletoe), you don't 
have to have a free hand to take this action, and you can touch 
the target with the focus instead. VERBAL CASTING 
In a loud and strong voice, you vocalize words of 
power, providing a verbal component for a spell.
Special If you're a bard Casting a Spell from the 
occult tradition while holding a musical instrument, you can 
play that instrument to replace any Verbal Casting actions with 
Material Casting actions by using the instrument as a spell 
focus instead. In this case, the Material Casting actions gain the 
auditory trait. 
DISRUPTING SPELLS
If you take damage from a reaction triggered by any of 
your spellcasting actions while Casting a Spell or the 
Concentrate on a Spell action, your spell may be disrupted. 
If the damage you take is equal to or greater than your 
level, the spell is lost (sometimes referred to as "wasted"). 
When you lose a spell, you've expended the prepared spell 
or spell slot, as well as all the spell's costs and the actions 
the Cast a Spell activity required, but the spell generates 
no effect. If a spell is disrupted during a Concentrate on 
a Spell action, the spell is instead immediately dismissed. Manipulate
SpellcastingAuditory
Concentrate
Spellcasting
RANGES, AREAS, AND TARGETS
Spells with a range can affect only targets within that range, 
create areas at some place within that range, or make 
something appear in the range. Most spell ranges are in 
feet, though some can stretch over miles, reach anywhere 
on the planet, or go even further. A spell with a range of 
touch requires you to physically touch the target during 
your Somatic Casting action. If you use such a spell against 
a creature against its will, you have to succeed at a melee 
touch attack (see Spell Attacks on page 197), and the spell 
gains the attack trait. Sometimes a spell has an area which can be an aura, 
burst, cone, or line. Areas are defined on page 299. If the 
spell emanates from your position, the spell has only an 
area; if you can cause the spell's area to appear farther 
away from you, the spell has both a range and an area. 
Some spells allow you to directly target a creature or 
object. The target creature or object must be within the 
spell's range, and you must be able to see it (or otherwise 
perceive it with a precise sense) to target it normally. 
You can attempt to target a creature you can't see, as 
described in Detecting Creatures on page 302. If you 
fail to target the creature, this doesn't change how the 
spell affects any other targets. If you choose a target that 
isn't valid, such as if you thought a vampire was a living 
creature and targeted it with a spell that can target only 
living creatures, your spell fails to target that creature. 
Spells that affect multiple creatures in an area can have 
both an area entry and a target entry.
LINE OF EFFECT
You usually need an unblocked path to the target of a 
spell, the origin point of an area, or the place where you 
create something with a spell. For more on line of effect, 
see page 298.
DURATIONS
The duration of a spell is how long the spell effect lasts. 
Spells that last for more than an instant have a duration 
entry. A spell can last until the start or end of a turn, or 
last for minutes or even longer. If a spell's duration is given 
in rounds, the number of rounds remaining decreases by 
1 at the start of each of the spellcaster's turns. When the 
duration reaches 0, the spell effect ends. Some spells have effects that last even after the spell's 
magic is gone. Any ongoing effect that isn't part of the 
spell's duration entry isn't considered magical. For instance, 
a spell that creates a loud sound and has no duration 
might deafen someone for a time (even permanently). 
This deafness couldn't be dispelled because it is not itself 
magical, though a restore senses spell could cure it. 
CONCENTRATION
If the spell's duration is concentration, it lasts until the 
end of your next turn unless you spend a Concentrate on 
a Spell action to extend the duration of that spell.197 
CONCENTRATE ON A SPELL 
Requirements 
You have at least one spell active 
with a concentration duration, and you are not fatigued.
Choose one spell with a concentration duration you have in 
efiect. The duration of that spell continues until the end of your 
next turn. Some spells may have slightly different or expanded 
effects if you concentrate. Concentrating on a Spell for more than 
10 minutes (60 rounds) ends the spell and makes you fatigued.
If you take damage equal to or greater than your level from 
a reaction or free action triggered by this action, your spell is 
disrupted and immediately dismissed.
DISMISSING
Some spells can be dismissed, ending the duration early 
due to some action you take or some event that occurs. If a 
spell can be dismissed voluntarily, the duration entry says 
so, and the method of how or when the spell is dismissed 
appears in the spell's description.
LONG DURATIONS
If your spell has a long enough duration to last past your 
next daily preparations, preparing a new spell in that slot 
(for a prepared caster) or recovering a spell slot of that 
level (for a spontaneous caster) automatically ends the 
previous spell's duration. You can choose not to prepare a 
spell or regain a spell slot in order to maintain the active 
spell until its duration runs out, but if you do, you can't 
prepare a new spell in that slot or cast a new spell from it 
until your next daily preparations. 
Spells with an unlimited duration are exempt from this 
rule. They last until dispelled, or until dismissed if they 
have a mode of dismissal. SPELL ATTACKS
Some spells require you to succeed at an attack roll to 
affect the target. This is usually because they require you 
to touch your target, precisely aim a ray, or otherwise 
make an accurate attack. Any attack you make is part of 
the spell's Somatic Casting action.
Usually, such spells require a melee touch attack or 
a ranged touch attack. In both cases, make an attack 
roll and compare the result to the target's TAC. Your 
proficiency modifier for a spell's attack roll is the same 
as your proficiency modifier with spell rolls. Spell attacks 
are unarmed, but they don't apply any special benefits 
from your weapons or unarmed attacks, nor do they deal 
any damage outside of what's listed in the spell. Melee 
touch attacks have the finesse trait (see page 182). On a 
successful attack, your spell affects the target, and on a 
failure the spell is lost unless otherwise noted. Spells with 
a range of "touch" always require a melee touch attack 
when used against an unwilling target, but not when used 
on a willing or unconscious target. 
Some spells require a normal melee attack or ranged 
attack instead of a touch attack. These work as described 
above, but they target AC instead of TAC.
Concentrate
DISPELLING
Some spells, such as dispel magic, can be used to dispel 
the effects of other spells. At least one creature, object, 
or manifestation of the spell you are trying to dispel must 
be within range of the spell that you are using to dispel it. 
Treat this as a counteract check (see page 319) using the 
spell's level as its counteract level and a spell roll for any 
necessary counteract check. 
LIGHT AND DARKNESS
Light and darkness from magical and nonmagical sources 
interact in specific ways. Nonmagical light always shines in 
nonmagical darkness and always fails to shine in magical 
darkness. Magical light always shines in nonmagical 
darkness, but it shines in magical darkness only if the light 
spell has a higher level than the darkness effect. Spells 
with the darkness trait or the light trait can always dispel 
one another, but bringing light and darkness into contact 
doesn't automatically cause one to dispel the other. You 
must cast a light spell on a darkness effect directly to dispel 
it (and vice versa), though certain spells automatically 
attempt to dispel opposing effects and describe how they 
do so. ACTING HOSTILE
Sometimes spell effects prevent a target from acting in a hostile fashion or end if a creature acts in a hostile fashion. A hostile act is one that can harm or damage another creature, whether directly or indirectly, but not 
those that a creature is unaware could cause harm. For instance, lobbing a fireball into a crowd would be a hostile act, but opening a door and accidentally freeing a horrible monster would not be a hostile act as long as the opener did not know the monster was there. The GM is the final arbitrator of what constitutes as acting hostile. TRIGGER STIMULUSA trigger stimulus is a simple sensory cue that causes a spell such as magic mouth to activate. A spell requiring a trigger stimulus activates as a reaction when the spell's 
sensor observes something that fits its defined trigger 
stimulus. Depending on the spell, the trigger stimulus can be a type of creature, such as "female humans" or "red-haired dwarves," or it could be an observed action such 
as "whenever someone enters the spell's area."
Disguises and illusions fool the spell as long as they appear to fit its trigger stimulus. For a spell to detect a visual trigger stimulus, the spell's origin point must have 
unimpeded line of sight to the trigger stimulus. Darkness 
doesn't prevent a visual trigger stimulus from being 
detected, but invisibility does, as does a successful Stealth check to Hide (if the result is greater than the spell's DC). 
For auditory trigger stimuli, line of sight isn't necessary, 
though the sound must be audible at the spell's origin 
point. Invisibility doesn't conceal an auditory trigger 
stimulus, but a Stealth check to Sneak can.198 WALLS
Some spells create walls. Each spell lists the depth, length, and height of the wall, and specifies how it can be positioned. Some walls can be shaped, meaning that you can manipulate the wall's shape into a form other 
than a straight line, choosing its path square by square. Each square of the wall's length must be adjacent with the 
square or squares next to it, so walls cannot be shaped to make a diagonal line. The path of a wall can't cover the 
same space more than once, but it can double back so one section is adjacent to another section of the wall. READING SPELLSEach spell uses the following format. Entries appear only 
when applicable, so not all spells will have every entry described here. In the heading, cantrips list "cantrip" 
instead of the spell and level, and powers are labeled as "power" along with their minimum level. SPELL NAME
  
SPELL [LEVEL]
Casting The spellcasting actions required to 
complete the spell are listed here. Spells that can be cast during 
a single round list their actions. Those that can be cast as a free 
action or a reaction instead of one or more actions indicate that 
in this entry. Spells that take longer to cast list the time required, 
such as "1 minute." These longer times also list the required types 
of spellcasting actions in parentheses, since you still can't cast 
the spell if you're unable to take the specifled type of action. 
Traits
If casting the spell has a Trigger
 or Requirement, that trigger or 
requirement is listed in this section.
Cost If the spell requires money or some other resource to cast it, 
the cost entry describes that requirement.
Range, Area, and Targets
 This entry lists the range of the spell, the area it afiects, and the targets it can afiect, if any. If none of 
these entries are present, the spell afiects only the caster.
Duration
 Spells with a duration end after the noted time. A spell 
that doesn't list a duration takes place instantaneously, and 
anything created by it persists after the spell.
The section after the line describes the effects of the spell. This section might have entries for what happens at different degrees 
of success and failure.
Heightened (level)
 If the spell can be heightened, the effects of heightening it appear at the end of the stat block.
READING SPELL LISTS
The spell lists on the following pages present the spells 
for the four magical traditions (though not powers, 
which are granted by class features and belong to no 
specific tradition). A superscript "H" included after a 
spell's name indicates that this spell has stronger effects 
when heightened. A superscript "U" indicates that the 
spell has an uncommon rarity, and a superscript "R" 
indicates that it is rare. You can't choose an uncommon 
or rare spell unless your class or the GM gives you access 
to it. For more information about uncommon and rare 
spells, see page 10. 
199 ARCANE SPELL LIST
Arcane casters choose spells 
from the following. 
Cantrips
Acid splash
HChill touchHDancing lightsDaze
Detect magicHDisrupt undeadHElectric arc
HGhost soundHLightHMage handHMessageHPrestidigitation
Produce flame
HRay of frost
HRead aura
HShieldHSigilHTanglefoot
HTelekinetic projectile
H1st-Level Spells 
Air bubbleAlarmHAnt haulBurning handsHCharmHColor spray
CommandHCreate water
Fear
HFeather fall
Fleet stepFloating disk
Goblin pox
Grease
Grim tendrilsHGust of windIllusory disguiseHIllusory objectHItem facadeHJumpHLock
HLongstrider
HMage armorHMagic auraH, UMagic missileHMagic weapon
MendingHNegate aroma
HRay of enfeeblement
Shocking graspHSleepHSpider stingSummon monsterHTrue strike
Unseen servant
Ventriloquism
H2nd-Level Spells 
Acid arrow
HBlurComprehend language
HContinual flameHCreate food
HDarknessHDarkvisionHDeafnessEndure elements
HEnlargeHFalse life
HFlaming sphere
HGentle repose
HGlitterdust
Hideous laughter
Humanoid
 formHIllusory creature
HInvisibilityHKnockMagic mouthMirror image
Misdirection
Obscuring mistPest form
HPhantom steedHResist energy
HSee invisibilityHShrinkHSpectral handSpider climbTelekinetic maneuver
Touch of idiocy
Water breathing
HWater walk
HWeb
H3rd-Level Spells 
Bind undeadBlindnessClairaudienceDispel magicDream message
HEarthbindEnthrallFeet to flns
Fireball
HGhostly weapon
HasteHHypnotic pattern
Invisibility sphere
HLevitate
Lightning boltHLocate
H, UMeld into stoneMind reading
UNondetectionUParalyze
HSecret page
Shrink itemSlow
HStinking cloudVampiric touch
HWall of wind
4th-Level Spells 
Aerial form
HBlinkClairvoyance
ConfusionHCreation
HDetect scryingH, UDimension doorHDimensional anchorDiscern liesUEnervation
Fire shield
HFlyH Freedom of movement
Gaseous formGlobe of invulnerabilityUHallucinatory terrain
H, UNightmare
UOutcast's curse
Phantasmal killerHPrivate sanctum
UResilient sphere
Rope trick
UShape stoneSolid fogSpell immunityStoneskinHSuggestionHTelepathy
HVeil
HWall of fire
HWeapon storm
H5th-Level Spells 
BanishmentHBlack tentaclesChromatic wall
HCloak of colorsCloudkillHCone of coldHControl water
Crushing despairHDrop dead
H, UElemental formHFalse vision
UHallucination
HIllusory sceneHMariner's curse
Mind probe
UPasswall
H, UPrying eye
SendingShadow siphon
Shadow walk
UTelekinetic haul
Telepathic bond
UTongues
UWall of ice
HWall of stone
H6th-Level Spells 
Baleful polymorphHChain lightningHCollective transposition
HDisintegrate
HDominate
H, UDragon formHFeeblemind
HFlesh to stoneMisleadPhantasmal calamityHPurple worm sting
Repulsion
ScryingUSpellwrackTeleport
H, UTrue seeing
Vampiric exsanguination
HVibrant pattern
Wall of force
H7th-Level Spells 
ContingencyH, UDimensional lockUDuplicate foe
HEnergy aegisHFiery bodyHLeng's sting
Magniflcent mansionUMask of terror
HPlane shiftUPower word blind
H, UPrismatic spray
Project image
HReverse gravity
USpell turningU200 Warp mind
8th-Level Spells 
Antimagic fleldRDisappearanceDiscern location
UDream council
EarthquakeHHorrid wiltingHMaze
Mind blankUMonstrosity form
Polar ray
HPower word stun
H, UPrismatic wall
Scintillating pattern
Uncontrollable dance
Unrelenting observation
9th-Level Spells 
DisjunctionUForesight
ImplosionHMeteor swarm
HPower word kill
H, UPrismatic sphere
Resplendent mansion
ShapechangeWeird
10th-Level Spells 
Gate
UTime stopUWishUDIVINE SPELL LISTDivine casters choose spells 
from the following. 
Cantrips 
Chill touchHDaze
Detect magicHDisrupt undeadHForbidding ward
HGuidanceKnow direction
HLightHMessageHPrestidigitation
Read aura
HShieldHSigilHStabilize
H1st-Level Spells 
Air bubbleAlarmHBaneBlessCommandHCreate water
Detect alignmentH, UDetect poisonH, UDisrupting weapons
HFear
HHarmHHealHLock
HMagic weapon
MendingHProtection
UPurify food and drinkRay of enfeeblement
SanctuarySummon monsterHVentriloquism
H2nd-Level Spells 
Augury
Calm emotionsContinual flameHCreate food
HDarknessHDarkvisionHDeafnessDeath knell
Endure elements
HFaerie fire
Gentle repose
HGhoulish cravings
Remove fear
HResist energy
HRestoration
HRestore senses
HSee invisibilityHShield otherSilenceHSound burstHSpiritual weapon
HStatus
HUndetectable alignmentUWater breathing
HWater walk
H3rd-Level Spells 
Bind undeadBlindnessCircle of protection
H, UCrisis of faithHDispel magicDream message
HHeroism
HLocate
H, UNeutralize poison
Remove disease
Sanctifled ground
Searing lightHVampiric touch
HZone of truthU4th-Level Spells 
Air walk
Dimensional anchorDiscern liesUDivine wrath
HEnervation
 Freedom of movement
Globe of invulnerabilityUOutcast's curse
Read omens
URemove curse
Spell immunityTalking corpse
U5th-Level Spells 
Abyssal plague
BanishmentHBreath of life
Death ward
Flame strikeHPrying eye
SendingShadow blast
H, USpiritual guardian
H6th-Level Spells 
Blade barrierHField of lifeHRaise deadH, URepulsion
Righteous mightHSpellwrackSpirit blastHStone tellUStone to fleshTrue seeing
Vampiric exsanguination
H7th-Level Spells 
Dimensional lockUDivine decree
HEnergy aegisHEthereal jaunt
H, UFinger of death
HLeng's sting
Plane shiftURegenerate
HWeakening ground
H8th-Level Spells 
Antimagic fleldRDiscern location
UDivine auraDivine inspiration
Moment of renewal
Spiritual epidemicWind walk
9th-Level Spells 
Bind soulUCrusadeH, UForesight
Overwhelming presence
Revival
UWail of the banshee
Weapon of judgment
H10th-Level Spells 
Avatar
UGate
UMiracleUOCCULT SPELL LIST
Occult casters choose spells 
from the following. 
Cantrips 
Chill touchHDancing lightsDaze
Detect magicHDisrupt undeadHForbidding ward
HGhost soundHGuidanceKnow direction
HLightHMage handHMessageHPrestidigitation
Read aura
HShieldHSigilHTelekinetic projectile
H1st-Level Spells 
AlarmHBaneBlessCharmHColor spray
CommandH201 Detect alignmentH, UFear
HFloating disk
Grim tendrilsHIllusory disguiseHIllusory objectHItem facadeHLock
HMage armorHMagic auraH, UMagic missileHMagic weapon
MendingHMindlinkPhantom painHProtection
URay of enfeeblement
SanctuarySleepHSootheHSummon monsterHTrue strike
Unseen servant
Ventriloquism
H2nd-Level Spells 
Augury
BlurCalm emotionsComprehend language
HContinual flameHDarknessHDarkvisionHDeafnessDeath knell
Faerie fire
False life
HGentle repose
HGhoulish cravings
Hideous laughter
Humanoid
 formHIllusory creature
HInvisibilityHKnockMagic mouthMirror image
Misdirection
ParanoiaHPhantom steedHRemove fear
HRemove paralysis
HResist energy
HRestoration
HRestore senses
HSee invisibilityHSilenceHSound burstHSpectral handSpiritual weapon
HStatus
HTelekinetic maneuver
Touch of idiocy
Undetectable alignmentU3rd-Level Spells 
Bind undeadBlindnessCircle of protection
H, UClairaudienceDispel magicDream message
HEnthrallGhostly weapon
HasteHHeroism
HHypercognition
Hypnotic pattern
Invisibility sphere
HLevitate
Locate
H, UMind reading
UNondetectionUParalyze
HSecret page
Slow
HVampiric touch
HZone of truthU4th-Level Spells 
BlinkClairvoyance
ConfusionHDetect scryingH, UDimension doorHDimensional anchorDiscern liesUEnervation
FlyHGaseous formGlobe of invulnerabilityUHallucinatory terrain
H, UModify memoryH, UNightmare
UOutcast's curse
Phantasmal killerHPrivate sanctum
URead omens
URemove curse
Resilient sphere
Rope trick
USpell immunitySuggestionHTalking corpse
UTelepathy
HVeil
H5th-Level Spells 
Abyssal plague
BanishmentHBlack tentaclesChromatic wall
HCloak of colors Crushing despairHDeath ward
Drop dead
H, UFalse vision
UHallucination
HIllusory sceneHMariner's curse
Mind probe
UPrying eye
SendingShadow blast
H, UShadow siphon
Shadow walk
USynaptic pulse
Synesthesia
HTelekinetic haul
Telepathic bond
UTongues
U6th-Level Spells 
Collective transposition
HDominate
H, UFeeblemind
HMisleadPhantasmal calamityHRepulsion
ScryingUSpellwrackSpirit blastHTeleport
H, UTrue seeing
Vampiric exsanguination
HVibrant pattern
Wall of force
H7th-Level Spells 
Dimensional lockUDuplicate foe
HEnergy aegisHEthereal jaunt
H, ULeng's sting
Magniflcent mansionUMask of terror
HPlane shiftUPossession
H, UPrismatic spray
Project image
HRetrocognition
HReverse gravity
UVisions of dangerHWarp mind
8th-Level Spells 
Antimagic fleldRDisappearanceDiscern location
UDream council
Maze
Mind blankUPrismatic wall
Scintillating pattern
Spiritual epidemicUncontrollable dance
Unrelenting observation
9th-Level Spells
Bind soulUForesight
Overwhelming presence
Prismatic sphere
Resplendent mansion
Unfathomable song
Wail of the banshee
Weird
10th-Level Spells
Alter reality
UFabricated truth
UGate
UTime stopUPRIMAL SPELL LISTPrimal casters choose spells 
from the following. 
Cantrips 
Acid splash
HDancing lightsDetect magicHDisrupt undeadHElectric arc
HGuidanceKnow direction
HLightHPrestidigitation
Produce flame
HRay of frost
HRead aura
HSigilHStabilize
HTanglefoot
H2021st-Level Spells 
Air bubbleAlarmHAnt haulBurning handsHCharmHCreate water
Detect poisonH, UFear
HFeather fall
Fleet stepGoblin pox
Grease
Gust of windHealHJumpHLongstrider
HMagic fangMendingHNegate aroma
HPass without traceHPurify food and drinkShillelaghShocking graspHSpider stingSummon nature's ally
Ventriloquism
H2nd-Level Spells 
Acid arrow
HAnimal messengerBarkskinHContinual flameHCreate food
HDarknessHDarkvisionHDeafnessEndure elements
HEnlargeHEntangleFaerie fire
Flaming sphere
HGentle repose
HGlitterdust

Humanoid
 formHObscuring mistPest form
HPhantom steedHRemove fear
HRemove paralysis
HResist energy
HRestoration
HRestore senses
HShape wood
ShrinkHSpeak with animalsSpider climbStatus
HTree shape
Water breathing
HWater walk
HWeb
H3rd-Level Spells 
Animal formHBlindnessDispel magicEarthbind Feet to flns
Fireball
HHasteHInsect formHLightning boltHMeld into stoneNeutralize poison
NondetectionURemove disease
Searing lightHSlow
HStinking cloudWall of thorns
HWall of wind
4th-Level Spells 
Aerial form
HAir walk
Creation
HDinosaur formHFire shield
HFlyH Freedom of movement
Gaseous formHallucinatory terrain
H, UShape stoneSolid fogSpeak with plantsStoneskinHWall of fire
HWeapon storm
H5th-Level Spells 
BanishmentHCloudkillHCone of coldHControl water
Death ward
Elemental formHMariner's curse
Moon frenzy
HPasswall
H, UPlant formHTree stride
H, UWall of ice
HWall of stone
H6th-Level Spells 
Baleful polymorphHChain lightningHDragon formHField of lifeHFire seeds
HFlesh to stonePurple worm sting
Stone tellUStone to fleshTangling creepers
True seeing
7th-Level Spells 
Energy aegisHFiery bodyHFinger of death
HLeng's sting
Mask of terror
HPlane shiftURegenerate
HSunburstHUnfettered pack
HVolcanic eruption
H8th-Level Spells 
EarthquakeHHorrid wiltingHMoment of renewal
Monstrosity form
Polar ray
HPunishing windsWind walk
9th-Level Spells 
DisjunctionUImplosionHMeteor swarm
HNature's enmity
ShapechangeStorm of vengeance
H10th-Level Spells 
Nature incarnate
UPrimal herd
UPrimal phenomenonU203 SPELL DESCRIPTIONSABERRANT WHISPERS
 POWER 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 15-foot aura; Targets
 each enemy in the area
Duration
 1 round
You utter phrases in an unknown tongue, assaulting the minds of 
those nearby. The efiect is based on the result of the target's Will 
save. Regardless of the result of each target's save, each target is 
bolstered against castings of 
aberrant whispers
.Success The target is unafiected. Failure
 The target is stupefled 2.Critical Failure 
The target is confused. ABYSSAL PLAGUE
  
SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Your touch afflicts the target with Abyssal plague. 
The efiect is based on the target's Fortitude save.
Success –2 conditional penalty on saves vs. Abyssal 
plague for 1 day or she contracts it, whichever comes first.
Critical Success The target is unafiected. 
Failure
 Affiicted with Abyssal plague at stage 1.
Critical Failure
 Affiicted with Abyssal plague at stage 2.
Abyssal Plague
 (disease) Level
 9. The drained condition from 
Abyssal plague can't be recovered until the disease is cured. 
Stage 1 drained 1 (1 day); 
Stage 2 drained increases by 2 (1 day).
ABYSSAL WRATH
 POWER 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 60-foot coneYou evoke the power of an Abyssal realm. The damage types of 
the spell (one energy and one physical) are based on the result of 
rolling on the table below. The spell gains the corresponding traits.
1d4 Realm
Manifestation
Damage Type
1 SkiesBolts of lightning and fiying debrisBludgeoning and electricity2 DepthsAcid and demonic shells
Acid and slashing
3 Frozen
Frigid air and ice
Bludgeoning and cold4 Volcanic
Jagged volcanic rocks 
and magmaFire and piercing
You deal 2d10 damage of the corresponding damage types to 
each creature in the cone; the creature must attempt a Reflex save. 
Success The creature takes half damage.
Critical Success The creature is unafiected. 
Failure
 The creature takes full damage of each damage type. 
Critical Failure
 It takes double damage of each damage type. 
Heightened (+2) The damage is increased by 1d10.
ACID ARROW
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Targets
 one creature or object
Make a ranged touch attack against the target. 
Auditory
EnchantmentMentalAttack
ChaoticDiseaseEvil
Necromancy
Evocation
Acid
Attack
Evocation
On a hit, you deal acid damage equal to 1d8 plus your spellcasting 
ability modifier plus 1d6 persistent acid damage. On a critical hit, 
double the damage, but not the persistent damage. Heightened (+2) 1d8 extra damage and 1d6 extra persistent damage.
ACID SPLASH
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature or object
You splash a glob of acid. Make a ranged touch 
attack. If you hit, you deal 1d4 acid damage plus 1 splash damage. 
On a critical success, the target also takes 1 persistent acid damage. The damage increases depending on your level.
Heightened (3rd)
 Damage increases to 1d4 + your spellcasting 
ability modifier, persistent damage increases to 2.
Heightened (5th) Damage increases to 2d4 + your spellcasting 
ability modifier, persistent damage increases to 3.
Heightened (7th) Damage increases to 3d4 + your spellcasting 
ability modifier, persistent damage increases to 4.
Heightened (9th) Damage increases to 4d4 + your spellcasting 
ability modifier, persistent damage increases to 5.
ACQUISITIVE'S FORTUNE
 POWER 
1 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 24 hours
You call upon good fortune to protect from brutal calamity in 
daily work. If your target rolls a critical failure on a Lore check to 
Practice a Trade, it rerolls the check and takes the second result.
AERIAL FORM
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedYou transform into a Medium fiying animal battle form. You count 
as an animal in addition to your normal traits. Your gear is absorbed 
into you; the constant abilities of your gear still function, but you 
can't activate it. When you transform, you gain the following:

Ł AC 26 (TAC 25), ignore armor's check penalty and reduced Speed.

Ł One or more unarmed melee attacks, which are the only 
types of attacks you can use. You're trained with them. Your 
attack modifier is +13 and your damage bonus is +5. These are 
Dexterity based (for the purpose of sluggish, for example).

Ł 5 temporary Hit Points while you have the form.

Ł Low-light vision.

Ł Acrobatics bonus of +14 unless your own bonus is higher.
These special statistics can be adjusted only by penalties, 
circumstance bonuses, and conditional bonuses. Your battle form 
prevents casting spells, speaking, or taking most manipulate 
actions that require hands. (The GM decides if there's doubt.) You 
can dismiss the spell with a concentrate action. When you prepare 
this spell, choose from the options below. You gain the attacks, 
Speeds, and special abilities listed. You can choose the speciflc 
type of animal (such as an owl or eagle for bird). This has no efiect 
on the Size or statistics.

Ł Bat
 Speed 20 feet, fiy Speed 30 feet; echolocation 40 feet 
(auditory blindsight); fangs Damage 2d8 piercing; wing (agile), 
 Damage 2d6 bludgeoning. Acid
CantripEvocation
Divination
Fortune
Polymorph
Transmutation
204
Ł Bird
 Speed 10 feet, fiy Speed 50 feet; beak, Damage 2d8 piercing; talon (agile), 
Damage 1d10 slashing.
Ł Pterosaur
 Speed 10 feet, fiy Speed 40 feet; scent; beak, Damage 3d6 piercing.

Ł Wasp
 Speed 20 feet, fiy Speed 40 feet; stinger, 
Damage 1d8 piercing plus 1d6 persistent poison.
Heightened (5th) Your battle form is Large and your fiy Speed 
is accelerated 10. You must have enough space to expand or the 
spell is lost. Your statistics are AC 28 (TAC 26); attack modifier of 
+15; damage bonus +8; 10 temporary HP; Acrobatics +18.
Heightened (6th) Your battle form is Huge, your attacks have 
10-foot reach, and your fiy Speed is accelerated 15 feet. You must 
have enough space or the spell is lost. Your statistics are AC 
31 (TAC 28); attack modifier +19; damage bonus +4 and double 
damage dice (including persistent damage); 15 temporary HP; Acrobatics +20.
AGILE FEET
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting; 
Trigger
 You Step or Stride.
For the Stride, you're accelerated 5 feet and ignore dificult 
terrain. For the Step, you ignore dificult terrain.
AIR BUBBLE
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Verbal Casting; 
Trigger
 A creature 
within range enters an environment where it can't breathe.
Range 60 feet; Targets
 the triggering creature
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedA bubble of pure air appears around the target's head, allowing it 
to breathe normally. The spell is dismissed as soon as the target 
returns to an environment where it can breathe normally.
AIR WALK
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minuteThe target can walk on air as if it were solid ground. It can ascend 
and descend in this way at a maximum of a 45-degree angle.
ALARM 
 SPELL 
1 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal); 
Requirements
 3 gp silver bell focus
Range touch; Area
 20-foot burstDuration
 8 hoursThe focus is whisked away until the magic is broken or the spell 
expires. When you cast 
alarm, select a password. Whenever a 
Small or larger corporeal creature enters the spell's area without 
speaking the password, 
alarm sends your choice of a mental alert 
that awakens you (in which case the spell gains the mental trait) or 
an audible alarm with the sound and volume of a hand bell (in which 
case the spell gains the auditory trait). Either option automatically 
awakens you, and the bell allows each creature in the area to awake 
if it succeeds at a DC 15 Perception check. A creature aware of the 
alarm must succeed at a Stealth check against the spell's DC or 
trigger the alarm when moving into the area.
Heightened (3rd)
 You can specify criteria for creatures that sound 
the alarm. For instance, orcs or people with red hair.
Transmutation
Conjuration
Transmutation
Abjuration
ALLEGRO
 CANTRIPCasting  Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one allyDuration
 1 round
You perform rapidly, speeding your ally. The ally 
is quick and can use the action to Strike, Stride, or Step. ALTER REALITY
 SPELL 
10
Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting,
  Verbal Casting
You use your occult lore and the power of your mind to manipulate 
the spiritual multiverse, resulting in any of the following effects:

Ł Duplicate any occult spell of 9th level or lower.

Ł Duplicate any non-occult spell of 7th level or lower.

Ł Produce any effect whose power is equivalent to any occult 
spell 9th level or lower, or non-occult spell 7th level or lower. 
At the GM's discretion, you can try to produce greater effects, 
but this is dangerous and the spell may have only a partial effect.
ANCESTRAL SURGE
 POWER 
1 Casting  Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 round
You gain a +1 conditional bonus to spell rolls and spell DCs.
If you have available Spell Points, you can spend 1 Spell Point 
and Concentrate on a Spell to extend its duration by 1 round.
ANGELIC HALO
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minuteYou gain the effects of 
protection 
against evil. 
Heightened (3rd)
 The effect of the spell increases to that of a 
circle 
of protection 
against evil, centered on you for 1 minute.
Heightened (5th) The spell's duration increases to 1 hour.
ANGELIC WINGS
 POWER 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 3 rounds
Wings of pure light spread out from your back, granting you a fiy 
Speed of 30 feet. Your wings cast bright light in a 30-foot radius. 
When the duration would end, if you have Spell Points, you can 
spend 1 Spell Point to increase the duration by 3 rounds. When it 
ends, you fioat to the ground, with 
feather fall's effects.
Heightened (5th) The base duration, and the extra duration for 
spending 1 Spell Point, increase to 1 minute.
Heightened (7th)
 The base duration increases to 10 minutes. The 
extra duration for spending 1 Spell Point increases to 5 minutes.
ANIMAL FORM
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedYou transform into a Medium animal battle form. You count as an 
animal in addition to your normal traits. Your gear is absorbed into 
you; the constant abilities of your gear still function, but you can't 
activate it. When you transform, you gain the following:

Ł AC 22 (TAC 20), ignore armor's check penalty and reduced Speed.
CantripCompositionEmotionEnchantmentMental 
Divination
EnchantmentAbjuration
GoodEvocation
Light 
Polymorph
Transmutation
205
Ł One or more unarmed melee attacks, which are the only types 
of attacks you can use. You're trained with them. Your attack 
modifier is +10 and your damage bonus is +5. These are Strength 
based (for the purpose of enfeebled, for example).

Ł 10 temporary Hit Points while you have the form.

Ł Low-light vision.

Ł Athletics bonus of +11 unless your own is higher.
These special statistics can be adjusted only by penalties, 
circumstance bonuses, and conditional bonuses. Your battle form 
prevents casting spells, speaking, or using most actions with the 
manipulate trait that require hands. (The GM decides if there's 
doubt.) You can dismiss the spell with a concentrate action.
If you prepare this spell, choose from the options below. You 
gain the attacks, Speeds, and special abilities listed. You can 
choose the speciflc type of animal (such as lion or snow leopard 
for cat). This has no effect on size or statistics.

Ł Ape Speed 25 feet, climb Speed 20 feet; scent; flst, Damage 2d6 
bludgeoning
Ł Bear Speed 25 feet; scent; jaws, 
Damage 2d8 piercing; claw 
(agile), Damage 1d8 slashing.
Ł Bull Speed 30 feet; scent; horn, Damage 2d8 piercing.

Ł Canine Speed 40 feet; scent; jaws, 
Damage 2d8 piercing.

Ł Cat
 Speed 40 feet; scent; jaws, 
Damage 2d6 piercing; claw 
(agile), Damage 1d10 slashing.
Ł Deer Speed 45 feet; scent; antler, 
Damage 2d6 piercing.

Ł Frog
 Speed 25 feet, swim, Speed 25 feet; scent; jaws, 
Damage 2d6 
bludgeoning; tongue (reach 15 feet), 
Damage 2d4 bludgeoning.
Ł Shark swim Speed 35 feet; scent; jaws, 
Damage 2d8 piercing.

Ł Snake Speed 20 feet, climb Speed 20 feet, swim Speed 20 feet; 
scent; fangs, Damage 2d4 piercing plus 1d6 poison.
Heightened (4th) Your battle form is Large and your attacks have 
10-foot reach. You must have enough space to expand or the spell 
is lost. Your statistics are AC 25 (TAC 22); attack modifier +14; 
damage bonus +9; 15 temporary HP; Athletics +14.
Heightened (5th) Your battle form is Huge and your attacks have 
15-foot reach. You must have enough space to expand or the spell 
is lost. Your statistics are AC 27 (TAC 24); attack modifier of +16; 
damage bonus +7 and double the number of damage dice; 20 
temporary HP; Athletics +18.
ANIMAL MESSENGER
 SPELL 
2 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range 120 feetDuration
 1 week
You offier a gift of food, and an ordinary Tiny wild animal within 
range approaches to eat it. You imprint the image, direction, and 
distance of an obvious place or landmark well known to you within 
the animal. Optionally, you can attach a small object or note up to 
light Bulk to it. The animal does its best to reach the destination; if 
it does, it waits nearby until the duration expires, allowing other 
nonhostile creatures to approach it and remove the attached object.
If there are no Tiny wild animals in range, the spell is lost.
ANT HAUL
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
EnchantmentMentalTransmutation
Duration
 8 hoursThe target can carry 3 more Bulk than normal before becoming 
encumbered and up to a maximum of 6 more Bulk.
ANTIMAGIC FIELD
 SPELL 
8 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 10-foot auraDuration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
Spells can't penetrate the area, magic items cease to function within 
it, and no one inside can cast spells or use magic abilities. Likewise, 
spells—such as dispel magic—can't affect the fleld itself unless they 
are of a higher level. Magic effects resume the moment they pass 
outside the fleld. For example, a ray fired from one side of the fleld 
could target a creature on the other side (as long as caster and 
target are outside). A summoned creature winks out of existence 
but reappears if the fleld moves or ends. Invested magic items cease 
to function, but they remain invested and function when the item 
exits; the ability boost from a potent item isn't suppressed. Spells of 
a higher level than the 
antimagic field overcome its effects, and can 
even be cast by a creature within the fleld.
The fleld disrupts only magic, so a 
+3 longsword
 still functions as 
a master-quality longsword. Magically created creatures (such as 
golems) function normally within an antimagic field. ARCANE COUNTERMEASURE
 POWER 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting; 
Trigger
 A creature 
within range that you can see casts a spell.
Range 120 feet; Targets
 the spell cast by the triggering creature
You undermine the target spell, making it easier to defend against. 
You reduce the spell's level by 1, and targets gain a +1 conditional 
bonus to any saving throws, skill checks, AC, or DC against it.
You can't reduce the spell's level below its minimum (if any). 
For example, a 5th-level 
cone of cold would remain 5th-level, but a 
5th-level 
fireball
 would become 4th-level.
ARTISTIC FLOURISH
 POWER 
2 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 one item or work of art 
Duration
 24 hours
You infuse the target with artisanal and artistic vision. Its quality 
increases to match your proficiency rank in Crafting, to a maximum 
of expert. The target is a beautiful and impressive piece for its new 
quality, but the effect is obviously temporary, so it can't be sold for 
more than normal. This doesn't allow you to use the target to Craft 
a magic item that requires the new quality or perform any other 
task requiring a permanent item of that quality.
Heightened (4th) If you spend 1 additional Spell Point, the 
maximum quality increases to master. 
Heightened (8th) If you spend 2 additional Spell Points, the 
maximum quality increases to legendary. 
ATHLETIC EXPLOIT 
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting
Until the end of your turn, you don't take check penalties or Speed 
reduction from armor or encumbrance.
Abjuration
Abjuration
Transmutation
Transmutation
206 AUGMENT SUMMONING
 POWER 
1 Casting  Verbal Casting; 
Trigger
 You complete 
an arcane spell that summons a creature.
The summoned creature gains a +1 conditional bonus to attack 
rolls, AC, and saving throws for the duration of the triggering spell.
AUGURY
 SPELL 
2 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
You ask about the results of a particular course of 
action. The spell can predict results up to 30 minutes into the future, 
and reveals the GM's best guess among the following outcomes.

Ł Weal
 The results will be good.

Ł Woe
 The results will be bad.

Ł Weal and Woe
 The results will be a mix of good and bad.

Ł Nothing There won't be particularly good or bad results.
The GM rolls a secret DC 6 flat check. On a failure, the result 
is always "nothing." This makes it impossible to tell whether a 
"nothing" result is accurate. If anyone casts 
augury on the same topic, use the secret roll result from the first casting. It's possible 
to get a diffierent result if circumstances change.
AVATAR
 SPELL 
10
Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedYou transform into an avatar of your deity, assuming a Huge 
battle form. You must have space to expand or the spell is lost. 
You count as a deity in addition to your normal traits. Your gear 
is absorbed into you; the constant abilities of your gear still 
function, but you can't activate it. When you transform, you gain 
the following:

Ł AC 42 (TAC 39), ignore armor's check penalty and reduced Speed.

Ł One or more attacks, which are the only types of attacks you 
can use. You're trained with them. Your attack modifier is +31 
and the damage bonus is listed. Melee attacks are Strength 
based (for the purposes of enfeebled, for example) unless they 
have the flnesse trait, and all ranged attacks are Dexterity 
based. They target the enemy's AC. Even if they deal positive or 
negative damage, they don't heal creatures.

Ł 30 temporary Hit Points while you have the form.

Ł Darkvision.
Ł Athletics bonus of +31 unless your own bonus is higher.
These statistics can be adjusted only by penalties, circumstance 
bonuses, and conditional bonuses. This form prevents spellcasting 
and most manipulate actions that require hands (the GM decides if 
there's doubt). You can dismiss the spell with a concentrate action.
When in battle form, you gain the attacks, Speeds, and special 
abilities listed for your deity below.

Ł Abadar Speed 50 feet, immune to hampered
 and immobilized, burrow
 Speed 30 feet; crossbow (range
 120 feet, reload
 1), Damage 6d10+3 piercing
.
Ł Asmodeus Speed 70 feet, immune to hampered, air walk; mace 
(reach
 15 feet), Damage 6d10+6 bludgeoning; hellfire 
(range 120 feet), Damage 6d6+3 fire
.
Ł Calistria Speed 30 feet, fiy Speed 70 feet; whip (disarm, flnesse nonlethal, reach
 20 feet), Damage 6d4+6 slashing; savored
 sting (range 60 feet), Damage 6d6+3 poison. Conjuration
Divination
Prediction
Polymorph
Transmutation

Ł Cayden
 Cailean Speed 70 feet, ignore
 dificult terrain (and 
greater), air walk; rapier (deadly, reach
 15), Damage 6d6+6 piercing; ale splash (range 120 feet), Damage 6d6+3 poison.
Ł Desna Speed 30 feet, fiy Speed 70 feet; starknife (agile, deadly, flnesse, reach
 15, silver, 
thrown
 60), Damage 6d4+6 piercing; moonbeam (range 120 feet, silver
), Damage 6d6+3 fire
.
Ł Erastil Speed 70 feet, ignore
 dificult terrain (and greater), air walk; longbow
 (deadly, range 150), Damage 6d8+3 piercing
.
Ł Gorum Speed 70 feet, immune to hampered
 and immobilized; greatsword 
(versatile
 P, reach
 15), Damage 6d12+6 slashing.
Ł Gozreh
 fiy Speed 70 feet, swim Speed 70 feet, no land Speed; ignore
 dificult terrain (and greater); wind (versatile
 electricity, range 120 feet), Damage 6d6+3 bludgeoning; waves
 Damage 6d8+6 bludgeoning (bull rush, reach
 15, thrown
 20).
Ł Iomedae Speed 70 feet, immune to hampered, air walk; shield (15 Hardness, can't be dented or broken
); longsword 
(versatile
 piercing, reach
 15 feet), Damage 6d8+6 slashing.
Ł Irori
 Speed 80 feet, immune to hampered, air walk; unfettered
 strike (agile, versatile
 S or P, flnesse, reach
 15), 
Damage 6d8+6 bludgeoning; wind strike (range 60), Damage 6d4+6 bludgeoning.
Ł Lamashtu Speed 30 feet, fiy Speed 70 feet; falchion (forceful, reach
 15 feet), Damage 6d10+6 slashing; waters
 of Lamashtu, (range 120 feet), Damage 6d6+3 poison.
Ł Nethys Speed 70 feet, immune hampered, air walk; raw
 magic (versatile
 cold, electricity, fire, range 120), Damage 6d6 force
.
Ł Norgorber Speed 70 feet, ignore
 dificult terrain and greater
 dificult terrain, air walk; short sword 
(agile, flnesse, versatile
 slashing, reach
 15 feet), Damage 6d6+6 piercing; blackflnger toss (range 120 feet), Damage 6d6+3 poison.
Ł Pharasma Speed 70 feet, immune to hampered, air walk; dagger 
(agile, flnesse, reach
 15 feet, thrown
 40 feet), Damage 6d6+6 slashing; spiral blast (range 120 feet, damages only 
undead, Damage 6d8+3 positive
).
Ł Rovagug
 Speed 50 feet, immune to hampered
 and immobilized, burrow
 Speed 30 feet; jaws 
(reach
 15 feet), Damage 6d12+6 piercing; leg (agile, versatile
 piercing, reach
 15 feet), Damage 6d8+6 bludgeoning.
Ł Sarenrae
 Speed 30 feet, fiy Speed 70 feet; scimitar (forceful, nonlethal, reach
 15 feet), Damage 6d6+6 slashing; everflame 
(nonlethal, range 120 feet), Damage 6d6+3 fire
.
Ł Shelyn Speed 70 feet, ignore
 dificult terrain and greater
 dificult terrain, air walk; glaive 
(deadly, nonlethal, reach
 20 feet), 
Damage 6d8+6 slashing; melody of inner beauty, 
(nonlethal, range 120 feet), Damage 6d6+3 sonic.
Ł Torag
 Speed 50 feet, immune to hampered
 and immobilized, burrow
 Speed 30 feet; shield (15 Hardness, can't be dented or broken
); warhammer 
(bull rush, reach
 15 feet), Damage 6d8+6 bludgeoning.
Ł Urgathoa
 Speed 70 feet, immune to hampered, air walk; scythe 
(deadly, trip, reach
 15 feet), Damage 6d10+6 slashing; pallid plague (range 120 feet), Damage 6d6+3 negative
.
Ł Zon-Kuthon
 Speed 70 feet, ignore
 dificult terrain and greater
 dificult terrain, air walk; spiked chain (disarm, trip, reach
 15 feet), Damage 6d8+6 slashing; midnight pain (mental, nonlethal, range 120 feet), Damage 6d6+3.207 BALEFUL POLYMORPH
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 varies
You attempt to transform the target creature into a harmless animal 
appropriate to the area, with effects based on its Fortitude save.
Success The target's body gains minor features of the harmless 
animal. Its insides churn, causing it to be sick 1. When it 
recovers from the sickness, its features revert to normal.
Critical Success The target is unaffected. Failure
 The target transforms for 1 minute but keeps its mind. 
It can spend all its actions on its turn concentrating on its 
original form, granting it a Will save to end the effect.
Critical Failure
 The target is transformed into the chosen 
harmless animal, body and mind, for 1 day.
Heightened (8th) On a critical failure, the duration is unlimited.
BANE
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 30-foot aura; Targets
 enemies in the auraDuration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
Divine censure makes it dificult for your enemies to attack. Targets 
take a –1 conditional penalty to attack rolls. 
Bane can dispel bless. BANISHMENT
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature that isn't on its home plane
You send the target back to its home plane, to the place it was 
before leaving. The effect depends on the target's Will save. You can 
add a Material Casting action to give the creature a –2 circumstance 
penalty to its save. The component must be a specially gathered 
object that is anathema to the creature, not from a spell component 
pouch. You can cast this spell only when you're on your home plane.
Success The creature resists being banished.
Critical Success The creature resists being banished and you 
are stunned until the end of your next turn.
Failure
 The creature is banished.
Critical Failure
 The creature is banished and can't return to 
your home plane by any means for 1 week.
Heightened (9th) You can target up to 10 creatures. The extra 
material component affects these targets if it is anathema to them.
BARKSKIN
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minuteThe target's skin is covered in bark. The target gains resistance 1 to 
bludgeoning and piercing damage and weakness 2 to fire.
Heightened (+2)
 The resistances increase by 2 and weakness by 3.
BIND SOUL
 SPELL 
9 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting; 
Requirements 
black sapphire with a gp value of at 
least the target's level × 100
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature that died within the last minute
Duration
 unlimitedPolymorph
Transmutation
EnchantmentMentalAbjuration
Abjuration
PlantEvil
Necromancy
You wrench the target's soul and imprison it in a black sapphire. 
The soul can't be returned to life through any means, even a 
miracle
 or wish. If the gem is destroyed or 
soul bind
 is dispelled on 
the gem, the soul is free. The gem has AC 16, TAC 12, and Hardness 
10. A gem can't hold more than one soul, and attempting to put 
another soul into it wastes the spell.
BIND UNDEAD
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one mindless undead creature with a level 
no greater than 
bind undead's
 spell level
Duration
 1 day
You control the target. It gains the minion trait. If you or an ally 
acts hostile to the target, the spell ends. BIT OF LUCK
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting; 
Trigger
 You or an ally 
within range fails an attack roll, saving throw, or 
skill check by 1 and did not benefit from a conditional bonus. 
Range 30 feetYou tilt the scales of luck slightly, adding a +1 conditional bonus to 
the check retroactively, thus making the check a success.
BLACK TENTACLES
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Area
 20-foot burst adjacent to a flat surface
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedTentacles rise and attempt to Grapple each creature in the area. 
Make spell rolls against the Fortitude DC of each creature. Any 
creature you succeed against is grabbed and takes 2d6 bludgeoning 
damage. Whenever a creature ends its turn in the tentacles, the 
tentacles attempt to grab that creature if they haven't already, and 
deal 1d6 bludgeoning damage to any creature grabbed. 
The tentacles' escape DC is equal to your spell DC. A creature 
can attack a tentacle in an attempt to release its grip. It has AC 25 
and TAC 23 and is destroyed if it takes 12 damage or more.
BLADE BARRIER
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feetDuration
 1 minuteBlades of force form a churning wall. The wall is a straight line 20 
feet high, 120 feet long, and 2 inches thick and provides cover. You 
deal 6d8 force damage to each creature in its space when the wall 
is created, that attempts to pass through the wall, or that ends its 
turn inside the wall; the creature must attempt a Reflex save. A 
creature that succeeds when the wall is created is pushed to the 
nearest space on the side of its choice.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure
 The creature takes full damage.
Critical Failure
 The creature takes double damage. If it was trying 
to move through, it fails but can try again with later actions.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d8.
Necromancy
Divination
Fortune
Conjuration
Evocation
Force
208 BLESS SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 30-foot aura; Targets
 you and allies in the aura
Duration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
Blessings from beyond make your companions potent. They gain a 
+1 conditional bonus to attack rolls. 
Bless can dispel bane. BLIND AMBITION
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal
 CastingRange 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 10 minutesYou strengthen a target's ambition, increase its resentment of allies, 
and make it easier to turn. The effects depend on its Will save.
Success Attempts to Coerce, Request, or use mental effects to 
convince the target to advance its own ambitions take half the 
usual circumstance penalties (or gain bonuses on the target's 
save) for being against the target's convictions or nature.
Critical Success The target takes no effect. Failure
 Attempts to Coerce, Request, or use mental effects to 
convince the target to advance its own ambitions ignore any 
circumstance penalties (or bonuses on the target's save) for 
being against the target's convictions or nature, and they 
seem reasonable for effects like 
suggestion. Critical Failure 
The target is overcome with ambition, taking 
whatever actions would advance its own agenda over that 
of its allies, even without attempts to convince the target.
BLINDNESS SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
You blind the target. The effect is determined by the target's Fortitude 
save. The target is bolstered against all castings of 
blindness. Success The target is blinded until its next turn begins.
Critical Success The target is unaffected. 
Failure
 The target is blinded for 1 minute. Critical Failure
 The target is blinded permanently.
BLINK SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minuteYou blink quickly between the Material and Ethereal Planes. You gain 
resistance 5 to all damage (overcome by force). You can Concentrate 
on the Spell to vanish and reappear 10 feet in a random direction 
determined by the GM; the movement doesn't trigger reactions. At 
the end of your turn, you vanish and reappear as above.
BLUR
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minuteThe target's form appears blurry and it is concealed.
BREATH OF LIFE
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Verbal Casting; 
Trigger
 A living creature 
within range would die.
Range 60 feet; Targets
 the triggering creature
EnchantmentMentalEmotionEnchantmentMental 
Necromancy
Conjuration
Teleportation
IllusionVisualHealingNecromancy
Positive
The target regains 4d8 plus your spellcasting ability modifier 
Hit Points, reduces its dying condition to dying 3, and gets a +2 
conditional bonus to its next recovery save. You can't use 
breath of 
life if the triggering effect was 
disintegrate
 or a death effect.
BURNING HANDS
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 15-foot coneGouts of flame rush from your hands. You deal 2d6 fire damage to 
creatures in the area; they must each attempt a Reflex save.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Critical Success The creature takes no damage.
Failure
 The creature takes full damage.
Critical Failure
 The creature takes double damage.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
CALL OF THE GRAVE
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one living creature
You fire a dreadful ray. Make a ranged touch attack.
Success The target becomes frightened 1.Critical Success The target becomes frightened 2. 
Failure
 The target is unaffected. CALM EMOTIONS
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Area
 10-foot burstDuration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
Creatures in the area become calm, depending on their Will saves.
Success Calming urges give a –1 conditional penalty to attack rolls.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure
 You suppress emotion effects and prevent the creature 
from acting hostile. If it is subject to hostility from any other 
creature, it ceases to be affected by 
calm emotions. Critical Failure
 As failure, but hostility doesn't end the effect.
CAPTIVATING ADORATION
 POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting,  Verbal Casting
Area
 15-foot auraDuration
 1 minuteYou become entrancingly beautiful and desirable, and creatures 
are distracted by their feelings for you as long as they remain 
within the area. The effect is determined by their Will saves. If a 
creature leaves and reenters, use the original save results.
 Success The creature takes a –1 conditional penalty to 
Perception and skill checks not directed at you.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure
 The creature is fascinated.
Critical Failure
 The creature is fascinated and its attitude 
toward you improves by one step.
CELESTIAL BRAND
 POWER 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one non-good creature
Duration
 1 round
A blazing symbol appears on the target, marking it for divine 
Evocation
Fire
Arcane
Attack
Fear
Necromancy
Wizard 
EmotionEnchantmentMentalEmotionEnchantmentMental 
CurseNecromancy
209justice. You and your allies receive a +1 conditional bonus to your 
attack rolls and skill checks against it. Anytime a good creature 
damages it, it deals 2d4 additional good damage. The target is 
bolstered against all castings of 
celestial brand
.Heightened (+2) The good damage increases by 1d4.
CHAIN LIGHTNING
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 500 feet;
 Targets
 one creature, plus any 
number of additional creatures
You discharge a powerful bolt of lightning at the target, dealing 
7d12 electricity damage unless it succeeds at a Reflex save. The 
electricity arcs to another creature within 30 feet of the first 
target, jumps to another creature within 30 feet of that target, 
and so on. You can end the chain at any point. You can't target the 
same creature more than once, and you must have line of effect to 
all targets. Targets after the first take 6d12 electricity damage and 
must attempt a Reflex save. Roll the damage only once and apply 
it to each target (halving or doubling when necessary).Success The targets take half damage. Critical Success The targets are unaffected, and the chain ends.
Failure
 The targets take full damageCritical Failure
 The targets take double damage. Heightened (+1) The damage to all targets increases by 1d12.
CHARM SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one humanoid creature
Duration
 1 hour or until dismissedElectricityEvocation
EmotionEnchantmentMentalTo the target, your words are honey and your visage bathed in 
dreamy haze. It must attempt a Will save, with a +4 circumstance 
bonus if you or your allies recently threatened it or acted hostile.
You can dismiss 
charm with a Verbal Casting action. If you act 
hostile to the target, the spell ends. When the spell ends, the target 
doesn't necessarily realize it was charmed unless its friendship 
with you or the actions you convinced it to take clash with its 
expectations, which could potentially allow you to convince the 
target to continue being your friend via mundane means.
Success The target is unaffected, but thinks your spell was 
something harmless instead of charm, unless it identifles the 
spell (usually with Identify Magic).Critical Success The target is unaffected and aware you tried 
to charm it. 
Failure
 The target's attitude becomes friendly toward you. If it 
was friendly, it becomes helpful. It can't act hostile toward you.
Critical Failure
 Target is helpful and can't act hostile toward you.
Heightened (4th) You can target any creature, not just humanoids.
Heightened (8th) You can target up to 10 creatures of any kind.
CHARMING TOUCH 
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one humanoid creature
Duration
 10 minutes or until dismissedYou infuse your target with love or lust, causing it to 
act friendlier. On a successful touch attack roll, the target attempts a 
Will save, with a +4 circumstance bonus if you or your allies recently 
threatened or acted hostile to it and a –2 circumstance penalty if 
you critically succeed on the attack roll or it allows you to touch it. 
Attack
EmotionEnchantmentMental210 You can dismiss the spell with a Verbal Casting action. If you act 
hostile to the target, the spell ends. When the spell ends, the target 
doesn't necessarily realize it was charmed unless its friendship 
with you or the actions you convinced it to take clash with its 
expectations, which could potentially allow you to convince the 
target to continue being your friend via mundane means. The 
effects of the Will save are the same effects as 
charm. Heightened (4th) You can target any type of creature, not just 
humanoids, as long as they would find you attractive.
CHARMING WORDS
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 until the start of your next turn
You whisper enchanting words with effects 
depending on the target's Will save. The target is bolstered.
Failure
 The target can't act hostile toward you.
Critical Failure
 The target is stunned. Success The target is unaffected. Critical Success You enrage the target; it gains a +2 circumstance 
bonus to attack rolls, spell rolls, and spell DCs against you.
CHILL TOUCH
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one living or undead creature
Your touch weakens the living and disorients undead. 
Make a melee touch attack. The effect of a hit depends on whether 
the target is living or undead. Heightening increases the damage.
Living Creature
 1d8 negative damage. On a critical hit, double 
damage and enfeebled 1 for 1 round.
Undead Creature
 Flat-footed for 1 round. On a critical hit, it's also 
fieeing for 1 round unless it succeeds at a Will save.
Heightened (3rd)
 Damage of 1d8 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (5th)
 Damage of 2d8 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (7th) Damage of 3d8 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (9th) Damage of 4d8 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
CHROMATIC WALL
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feetDuration
 10 minutesYou create an opaque wall of light in a vibrant color. The wall is 
straight and vertical, stretching 60 feet across and 30 feet high. If 
it would pass through a creature, the spell is lost. The wall sheds 
bright light 20 feet on each side. You can ignore its effects.
Roll 1d4 to determine the color of the wall. Each color has a 
particular effect on items, effects, or creatures that attempt to pass 
through. 
Chromatic wall
 can't be dispelled normally; rather, each 
color is automatically dispelled when targeted by a speciflc spell, 
even if that spell is a lower level than 
chromatic wall
.1: Red
 Destroys ranged weapon ammunition (such as arrows 
and crossbow bolts) that would pass through, and deals 15 fire 
damage to anyone passing through (Reflex half, or none on a 
critical success). Dispelled by 
cone of cold.2: Orange Destroys thrown weapons that would pass through, 
Auditory
EnchantmentLingualMentalAttack
Necromancy
Negative
Abjuration
and deals 20 acid damage to anyone passing through (Reflex 
half, or none on a critical success). Dispelled by 
gust of wind.3: Yellow
 Stops acid, cold, electricity, fire, force, negative, positive, 
and sonic effects from passing through, and deals 25 electricity 
damage to anyone passing through (Reflex half, or none on a 
critical success). Dispelled by 
disintegrate
.4: Green
 Stops toxins, gases, and breath weapons from passing 
through, and deals 10 poison damage to anyone passing 
through and makes them enfeebled 1 (Fortitude half damage 
and negate enfeebled, and no damage on a critical success) for 
1 minute. Dispelled by 
passwall
.Heightened (7th) The spell's duration increases to 1 hour. Roll 1d8 
to determine the wall's color. A red, orange, yellow, or green wall 
deals an extra 10 damage.
5: Blue Stops auditory, petriflcation, and visual effects from 
passing through, and those passing through suffier the effects 
of flesh to stone. Dispelled by 
magic missile.6:
 Indigo Stops divination and mental effects from passing 
through, and those passing through suffier the effects of 
warp 
mind. Dispelled by 
searing light.7: Violet Prevents spells from targeting the other side (area effects 
still cross as normal), and creatures passing through are slow 1 
for 1 minute (sent to another plane, as the effect of plane shift, on a critical failure). Dispelled by 
dispel magic.8: Reroll, and the wall's save DC gets a +2 conditional bonus.
CIRCLE OF PROTECTION
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Area
 10-foot-aura centered on the touched creature 
Duration
 1 minuteChoose chaotic, evil, good, or lawful. If you choose chaos, this spell 
gains the lawful trait and so on. Creatures in the area gain a +1 
conditional bonus to AC against attacks by creatures of the chosen 
alignment and saves against effects from such creatures. This 
increases to +3 against effects from such creatures that directly 
control the target and attacks made by such summoned creatures.
Summoned creatures of the chosen alignment can't willingly 
enter without a Will save. Use the first result for repeated attempts.
Heightened (4th) The duration increases to 1 hour.
CLAIRAUDIENCE
 SPELL 
3 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range 500 feetDuration
 1 minuteYou create an invisible fioating ear at a location within range (even if 
it's outside your line of sight or line of effect). It can't move, but you 
can hear through the ear as if using your normal auditory senses.
CLAIRVOYANCE
 SPELL 
4 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range 500 feetDuration
 1 minuteYou create an invisible fioating eye at a location within range (even if 
it's outside your line of sight or line of effect). The eye can't move, but 
you can see in all directions as if using your normal visual senses.
Abjuration
Divination
ScryingDivination
Scrying211 CLOAK OF COLORS
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minuteA cloak of swirling colors shrouds the target. Creatures are 
dazzled while adjacent to it, and attacks cause a brilliant fiash of 
light. When a creature hits the target with a melee attack, it must 
attempt a Will save. It's bolstered until the end of its next turn.
Success The attacker is unaffected. 
Failure
 The attacker is blinded for 1 round.
Critical Failure
 The attacker is stunned for 1 round.
CLOUDKILL
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Area
 20-foot burstDuration
 1 minute or until dismissedYou conjure a moving bank of poisonous fog. This functions as 
obscuring mist, except the area moves 10 feet away from you each 
round. You deal 5d6 poison damage to each breathing creature 
that starts its turn in the spell's area; each creature must attempt 
a Fortitude save.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Critical Success The creature takes no damage.
Failure
 The creature takes full damage.
Critical Failure
 The creature takes double damage.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d6.
COLLECTIVE TRANSPOSITION
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 30-foot aura; Targets
 up to two creatures
You teleport the targets to new positions within the area. The 
creature must be able to fit, and the position must be unoccupied, 
entirely within the area, and in your line of sight. Unwilling 
creatures can attempt a Will save.
Success The target is unaffected. 
Critical Success The target can choose to teleport, but it 
chooses the destination.
Failure
 You teleport the target and choose its destination.
Heightened (+1) The number of targets increases by one.
COLOR SPRAY
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 15-foot coneDuration
 1 or more rounds (see below)
Swirling colors affect viewers based on their Will saves.
Success Dazzled for 1 round.
Critical Success The target is unaffected. Failure
 Blinded for 1 round, dazzled for 4 rounds.
Critical Failure
 Stunned for 1 round, blinded for 4 rounds.
COMMAND SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 until the end of the target's next turn
You shout a command that's hard to ignore. You can 
IllusionVisualDeath
Necromancy
Poison
Conjuration
Teleportation
IllusionVisualAuditory
EnchantmentLingualMentalcommand the target to approach you, run away (as if it had the 
fieeing condition), drop what it's holding, drop prone, or stand in 
place. The effects depend on the target's Will save. 
Success The target is unaffected. 
Failure
 The target spends its first action doing as you 
commanded, and the spell is dismissed. Critical Failure
 The target does as you commanded, spending 
as many actions as possible doing so, and does nothing else. Heightened (5th) You can target up to 10 creatures.
COMMANDING LASH
 POWER 
2 Casting  Verbal Casting
Requirements 
Your last action must have been a 
Strike that dealt damage to a target.
You issue a command to the target, as the spell 
command. COMPETITIVE EDGE
 POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal
 CastingDuration
 1 minuteYour competitiveness drives you to better yourself 
against superior opposition. You gain a +1 conditional bonus to 
checks against a DC more than 11 greater than your total bonus 
before 
competitive edge; this doesn't affect your DCs. For instance, 
if you attempt a check at a +10 against a DC of 22 or higher, you 
gain the bonus, but if the DC is 21 or lower, you don't.
COMPREHEND LANGUAGE
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 hourThe target can understand the meaning of a single language it 
EnchantmentMentalEmotionEnchantmentMentalDivination
MAGIC AND MORALITY
Magic allows you to perform some pretty wondrous things in the 
game, but it can be used for terrible purposes. While some spells 
are obviously vile, or have the evil trait and a direct connection to 
the profane, other spells can be used for good or ill. Using magic 
does not free you from the morality of the outcome.
Nowhere is this more true than when it comes to enchantment 
spells, especially those used to compel a character to do something. These spells can remove the power of choice from 
a character and can very easily be used in ways that are evil. 
Dominating an ogre and forcing him to abandon his guard post is 
not necessarily evil, but using that same spell to force a merchant 
to give you all of his wares certainly is.
The ultimate judgment of whether a player is using a spell for 
an evil purpose is left up to the GM, but all players should take 
care when using such spells. Using a spell for an evil purpose can 
cause a player character's alignment to shift to evil. Far more 
importantly, these actions can negatively impact people at the 
table. Such spells might create situations that the echo truly awful 
experiences the players might have had, creating uncomfortable 
or hostile environments. Players and GMs should work to prevent 
these situations so everyone can focus on having fun at the table. 
212is hearing or reading when you cast the spell. This doesn't let it 
understand codes, language couched in metaphor, and the like.
Heightened (3rd)
 The target can also speak the language. Heightened (4th) You can target up to 10 creatures, and targets 
can also speak the language. CONE OF COLD
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 30-foot coneIcy cold rushes forth from your hands. You deal 11d6 cold damage to 
creatures in the area; they must each attempt a Reflex save. When 
Casting this Spell, you can add a Material Casting action to include a 
small crystal or icicle. If you do, increase the area to a 60-foot cone.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Critical Success The creature takes no damage.
Failure
 The creature takes full damage.
Critical Failure
 The creature takes double damage.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
CONFUSION SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedYou befuddle your target with strange impulses, causing it to act 
randomly. The effects are determined by the target's Will save.
Success Babbles incoherently and is slowed 1 for 1 round.
Critical Success The target is unaffected. 
Failure
 Confused for 1 minute. It can attempt a new save at the 
end of each of its turns to end the confusion. Critical Failure
 Confused for 1 minute with no save to end early.
Heightened (8th) You can target up to 10 creatures.
CONTINGENCY SPELL 
7 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Duration
 24 hours
You prepare a spell to trigger later. While casting 
contingency, you 
also cast another spell of 4th level or lower with a casting time of 
no more than three actions. You must pay any appropriate costs 
for the spell. This companion spell must be one that can affect 
you. You must make any decisions for the spell when you set the 
contingency, such as choosing damage type for 
resist energy
.During the casting, choose a trigger under which the spell will 
be cast, using the same restrictions as the trigger for a readied 
action. You can cause the companion spell to come into effect 
as a reaction with that trigger. It affects only you, even if it 
would normally affect more creatures. If you define complicated 
conditions, as determined by the GM, the trigger might fail.
If you cast 
contingency, the newer one supersedes the older.
Heightened (8th) You can choose a spell of 5th level or lower.
Heightened (9th) You can choose a spell of 6th level or lower.
Heightened (10th) You can choose a spell of 7th level or lower.
CONTINUAL FLAME
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Cost 6 gp worth of ruby dust
ColdEvocation
EmotionEnchantmentMentalAbjuration
Evocation
LightRange touch; Targets
 one objectDuration
 unlimitedA magical flame springs up from the object, as bright as a torch. It 
doesn't need oxygen, react to water, or generate heat.
Heightened (+1) The cost increases as follows: 16 gp for 3rd level; 
30 gp for 4th; 60 gp for 5th; 120 gp for 6th; 270 gp for 7th; 540 gp 
for 8th; 1,350 gp for 9th; and 3,350 gp for 10th. CONTROL WATER
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 500 feet; Area
 50 feet long by 50 feet wide
You can raise or lower the level of water in the chosen area by 
10 feet. Water creatures in the area suffier the effects of 
slow
.COUNTER PERFORMANCE
 POWER 
1 Casting  Verbal Casting, 
 Somatic Casting; 
Trigger
 You or an ally within 60 feet must roll a 
saving throw against an auditory or visual effect. 
Area
 60-foot auraYou protect yourself and allies through performance. 
Choose an auditory performance if the trigger was auditory or a 
visual performance if it was visual, then roll a Performance check 
for the chosen performance. You and allies in the area can use the 
higher result of your Performance check or their saving throw.
CREATE FOOD
 SPELL 
2 Casting 10 minutes (Somatic, Verbal)
Range 30 feetYou create enough food to feed six Medium creatures for a day; 
it's bland and unappealing and leaves the eater unsatisfled. After 1 
day, if no one has eaten the food, it decays and becomes inedible. 
Most Small creatures eat one-fourth as much as a Medium creature 
(one-sixteenth as much for most Tiny creatures), and most Large 
creatures eat 10 times as much (100 times as much for Huge 
creatures and so on). 
Heightened (4th) You can feed 12 Medium creatures.
Heightened (6th) You can feed 50 Medium creatures.
Heightened (8th) You can feed 200 Medium creatures.
CREATE WATER
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touchCupping your hands, water begins to fiow. You create 2 gallons of 
water. If no one drinks it, it evaporates after 1 day.
CREATION
 SPELL 
4 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range 0 feetDuration
 1 hourYou create a temporary standard-quality object. It must be of 
vegetable matter and 5 cubic feet or smaller. It can't rely on 
intricate artistry or complex moving parts, never functions 
as a cost or the like, and can't be made of special materials or 
materials with a rarity of uncommon or higher. It is obviously 
temporary conjured.
Heightened (5th) The item is expert quality and can use minerals.
Evocation
Water
CompositionEnchantmentFortune
MentalPower 
Conjuration
Conjuration
Water
Conjuration
213 CRISIS OF FAITH
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
You assault the target's faith, riddling the creature with doubt and 
mental turmoil for 6d4 mental damage, or 6d6 mental damage if it 
can cast divine spells. The effects are determined by its Will save.
Success The target takes half damage. Critical Success The target takes no damage. Failure
 The target takes full damage. Critical Failure
 The target takes double damage and can't cast 
divine spells for 1 round.
To many deities, casting this spell on a follower of your own deity 
without signiflcant cause is anathema.
Heightened (+1) Damage increases by 2d4 (2d6 if divine spellcaster)
CRUSADE SPELL 
9 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 60 feet; Targets
 up to 4 creatures
Duration
 5 minutesPronounce a cause. It can be to attain an item, claim a patch of 
land, slay a creature, war with a group, or be entirely peaceful. Your 
cause can't force the targets to harm one another or themselves. 
They become completely dedicated to that cause, depending on 
their levels. They choose their own actions, but they favor direct 
action over inaction or indirect action.

Ł 13th or Lower
 The target is so dedicated to the cause that it will 
pursue it to the death (unless you say otherwise).

Ł 14th The target is dedicated to the cause, but the spell ends for 
the target if it's reduced to 50 Hit Points or fewer.

Ł 15th As 14th, plus the target can attempt a Will save at the end 
of each turn to end the spell for itself.
The spell ends for all creatures if you or one of your allies acts 
hostile toward a target, or the cause is complete. The GM might 
determine this spell has alignment traits befitting the cause. Heightened (10th) The level limit for each category increases by 2.
CRUSHING DESPAIR
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 30-foot coneDuration
 1 or more rounds
You infiict despair on creatures in the area. The effects are 
determined for each creature by its Will save. 
Success For 1 round, it can't take reactions and must attempt 
another save at the start of its turn or be slowed 1 for that 
turn as it sobs uncontrollably.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure
 As a success, but lasting 1 minute. Critical Failure
 As failure, but automatically slowed 1 for 1 minute.
Heightened (7th) The area increases to a 60-foot cone.
DANCING LIGHTS 
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feetDuration
 concentration
You create up to four fioating lights, no two of which are more than 
10 feet apart. Each sheds light like a torch. When you Concentrate 
EnchantmentMentalEnchantmentLingualMentalEmotionEnchantmentMentalCantripEvocation
Lighton the Spell, you can move each light up to 60 feet. Each light must 
remain within range and within 10 feet of all others, or it winks out.
DARKENED EYES
 POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 60 feet; Targets
 one creature 
Duration
 1 round or 1 minute
You infuse a creature's vision with darkness depending on its 
Fortitude save. The target is bolstered.
Success It loses darkvision and gains low-light vision for 1 round. 
If it didn't have darkvision, it loses low-light vision instead.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure
 As success, but the effect last for 1 minute. 
Critical Failure
 As failure, but the target loses darkvision and 
low-light vision, and if it had neither, it's blinded for 1 minute.
DARKNESS
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Area
 20-foot burstDuration
 1 minuteA shroud of darkness prevents light from penetrating or emanating 
within the area. This suppresses magical light of the spell's level or 
lower. Light can't pass through, so creatures in the area can't see 
outside. From outside, it appears as a globe of pure darkness.
Heightened (4th) Even creatures with darkvision (but not greater 
darkvision) treat targets seen through the darkness as concealed. 
DARKVISION

 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 hourYou gain darkvision.
Heightened (3rd)
 The spell's range is touch and it targets 1 creature.
DAZE
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 60 feet; Targets
 1 creature
Duration
 1 round
You cloud the target's mind with effects determined by its Will save. 
Success The target is unaffected. 
Failure
 The target is flat-footed.
Critical Failure
 The target is flat-footed and slowed 1.
DAZZLING FLASH 
 POWER 
2 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Verbal
 CastingArea 
20-foot coneYou raise your religious symbol and create a blinding fiash. Creatures 
in the area are dazzled or blinded, depending on their Fortitude save.
Success The target is dazzled for 1 round. 
Critical Success The target is unaffected. Failure
 Blinded for its next action and dazzled for 1 minute. 
Critical Failure
 Blinded for 2 rounds and dazzled for 1 hour. 
DEAFNESS SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
DarknessTransmutation
DarknessEvocation
Divination
CantripEnchantmentMentalEvocation
LightNecromancy
214
The target loses hearing, depending on its Fortitude save, and is 
bolstered against all castings of 
deafness. Success The target is deafened for 1 round
Critical Success The target is unaffected. 
Failure
 The target is deafened for 10 minutes. Critical Failure
 The target is deafened permanently.
DEATH KNELL
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one living creature at 0 HP
You snuffi out a creature at the brink of death, based 
on its Will save. If this kills it, you gain 10 temporary HP and a +1 
conditional bonus to attack and damage rolls for 10 minutes.
Success The target increases its dying value by 1.
Critical Success The target is unaffected. 
Failure
 The target dies. DEATH WARD
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature touched
Duration
 1 minuteThe target is protected from negative energy. It receives a +4 
conditional bonus to saves against death and negative effects, gains 
resistance 10 to negative, and suppresses the effects of enervated.
DEATH'S CALL
 POWER 
2 Casting  Verbal Casting; 
Trigger
 You reduce an 
enemy to 0 HP. 
You gain temporary HP equal to the enemy's level, or twice the 
enemy's level if it was undead. It is bolstered against all castings of 
death's call
. The temporary HP last for 1 minute. 
DELUSIONAL PRIDE
 POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal
 CastingRange 30 feet; Targets
 one creature 
Duration
 varies
Attack
Death
Necromancy
Abjuration
Necromancy
EmotionEnchantmentMentalYou supercharge the target's confldence, causing it to rationalize 
failures as sour grapes. It takes a –2 conditional penalty to skill 
checks to retry a task it attempted and failed during the duration. 
On its turn, it takes a –1 conditional penalty to attack rolls if it 
failed its first attack, or –2 if it failed both of its first two attacks. 
The duration depends on its Will save, and it's bolstered.
Success The effect lasts for 1 round.
Critical Success The target is unaffected. Failure
 The effect lasts for 10 minutes. Critical Failure
 The effect lasts for 24 hours.
DESTRUCTIVE AURA
 POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 10-foot auraDuration
 1 minuteReduce resistances of creatures in the aura (including you) by 1.
Heightened (+2) Reduce resistances by an additional 1.
DESTRUCTIVE CRY
 POWER 
1 Casting  Verbal Casting
Requirements 
Your last action was a Strike that dealt damage.
You shout of glory and deal additional damage equal to your level. 
DETECT ALIGNMENT
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 30-foot auraYour eyes glow as you sense aligned auras. Choose chaotic, evil, 
good, or lawful. You detect auras of that alignment. You receive 
no information beyond presence or absence. You can choose not 
to detect creatures or effects you're aware have that alignment.
Only divine spellcasters, undead, and beings from the Outer 
Sphere have an alignment aura if they are 6th level or higher.
Heightened (2nd) You also learn each aura's location and strength.
DETECT MAGIC 
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 30-foot auraYou send out a magical pulse that registers the 
presence of magic. You receive no information beyond presence or 
absence of magic. You can choose to ignore magic you're fully aware 
of, such as you and your allies' magic items and ongoing spells.
You detect illusion magic only if that magic's effect has a lower 
level than the level of your 
detect magic spell. However, items that 
have an illusion aura but aren't deceptive in appearance (such as 
an invisibility potion) typically get detected normally.
Heightened (3rd)
 You learn the school of magic for the highest-
level magical effect within range that the spell detects. If multiple 
effects are equally strong, the GM determines which you learn. 
Heightened (4th) As 3rd level, but you also pinpoint the source of 
the highest-level magic. You don't learn the exact location but can 
narrow down the source to within a 5-foot cube. If the source is 
larger than that, you identify only the cube nearest to you.
DETECT POISON
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one object or creature
Evocation
Evocation
DetectionDivination 
CantripDetectionDivination
DetectionDivination
ALIGNMENT AURA
The strength of an alignment aura depends on the level of the 
creature, item, or spell. Clerics and other divine spellcasters with 
a patron deity are treated as 5 levels higher, as are undead and 
creatures from the Outer Planes.
Creature or Item Level
Aura Strength
0–5
None6–10
Faint
11–15
Moderate
16–20
Powerful
21+Overwhelming
Spell or Efiect Level
Aura Strength
0–3
Faint
4–7
Moderate
8+Powerful
215 You detect whether a creature is venomous or poisonous, or 
an object is poison or has been poisoned. You do not ascertain 
whether the target is poisonous in multiple ways, nor do you 
learn the type or types of poison. Certain substances like lead and 
alcohol are poisons and thus can mask other poisons.
Heightened (2nd) You determine the number and types of poison.
DETECT SCRYING
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 30-foot auraDuration
 10 minutesYou detect the presence of scrying effects in the area. If 
detect 
scrying is higher level than a scrying effect, you gain a glimpse of the 
scrying creature and learn its approximate distance and direction.
Heightened (6th) The duration increases to 24 hours.
DIMENSION DOOR
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 60 feetYou instantly transport yourself and any items you're wearing 
and holding from your current space to a clear space within range 
you can see. If this would bring another creature with you—even if 
you're carrying it in an extradimensional container—the spell is lost.
Heightened (5th) The range increases to 1 mile. You don't need to 
be able to see your destination, as long as you have been there 
in the past and know its relative location and distance from you.
DIMENSIONAL ANCHOR
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
DetectionDivination
Conjuration
Teleportation
Abjuration
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 varies
You interfere with the target's ability to travel dimensions. The 
target is immune to teleportation and any effect that would move 
it to a diffierent plane. The duration is determined by its Will save. 
Success The effect lasts for 1 round.
Critical Success No effect. 
Failure
 The effect lasts for 1 minute. Critical Failure
 The effects lasts for 1 hour.
DIMENSIONAL LOCK
 SPELL 
7 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Targets
 30-foot burstDuration
 1 day
You create a shimmering barrier that attempts to dispel all 
teleportation effects and planar travel into or out of the area, 
including items that allow access to extradimensional spaces 
(such as a bag of holding). Dimensional lock dispels any attempt 
to summon a creature into the area but doesn't stop the creature 
from departing when the summoning ends.
DIMENSIONAL STEPS
 POWER 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting
Range 10 feet or more
You teleport up to 10 feet within your line of sight.
If you have Spell Points, you can increase the cost by 1 Spell 
Point to increase the maximum distance by 10 feet.
Heightened (6th) The initial and increased distance are 15 feet.
Heightened (8th) The initial and increased distance are 20 feet.
Abjuration
Conjuration
Teleportation
216 DINOSAUR FORM
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedYou transform into a Large animal battle form. You must have 
space to expand or the spell is lost. You count as an animal in 
addition to your normal traits. Your gear is absorbed into you; the 
constant abilities of your gear still function, but you can't activate 
it. When you transform, you gain the following:

Ł AC 25 (TAC 22), ignore armor's check penalty and reduced Speed.

Ł One or more natural melee attacks, which are the only types of 
attacks you can use. You're trained with them. Your attack modifier 
is +14; your damage bonus is +9. These are Strength based.

Ł 15 temporary Hit Points while you have the form.

Ł Low-light vision and scent.

Ł Athletics bonus of +14 unless your own bonus is higher.
These special statistics can be adjusted only by penalties, 
circumstance bonuses, and conditional bonuses. Your battle form 
prevents casting spells, speaking, or using most actions with the 
manipulate trait that require hands (the GM decides if there's 
doubt). You can dismiss the spell with a concentrate action.
If you prepare this spell, choose from the following options. 
You gain the attacks, Speeds, and special abilities listed. You can 
choose the speciflc type of animal (such as allosaurus instead of 
tyrannosaurus). This has no effect on size or statistics.

Ł Ankylosaurus Speed 25 feet; +1 conditional bonus to AC, but not 
TAC; tail (backswing, reach 10 feet), 
Damage 2d6 bludgeoning; 
foot, Damage 2d6 bludgeoning.
Ł Brachiosaurus Speed 25 feet; tail (reach 15 feet), 
Damage 2d6 
bludgeoning; foot (2d8 bludgeoning).

Ł Deinonychus
 Speed 40 feet; talon (agile), Damage 2d4 piercing 
plus 1 persistent bleed; jaws, 
Damage 1d10 piercing.

Ł Stegosaurus Speed 30 feet; tail (reach 10), 
Damage 2d8 piercing.

Ł Triceratops
 Speed 30 feet; horn (2d8 piercing plus 1d6 
persistent bleed on a critical hit); foot (2d6 bludgeoning).

Ł Tyrannosaurus
 Speed 30 feet; jaws (deadly, reach 10), 
Damage 
1d12 piercing; tail (reach 10), 
Damage 1d10 bludgeoning. Heightened (5th) Your battle form is Huge and your attacks have 
15-foot reach, or 20 if they started with 15. Your statistics are AC 
27 (TAC 24); attack modifier +16; damage bonus +6 and double 
damage dice; 20 temporary HP; Athletics +17.
Heightened (7th) Your battle form is Gargantuan and your attacks 
have 20-foot reach, or 25 if they started with 15. Your statistics 
are AC 33 (TAC 29); attack modifier +23; damage bonus +18 and 
double damage dice; 25 temporary HP; Athletics +24.
DIRGE OF DOOM
 CANTRIPCasting  Verbal Casting
Area
 30-foot auraDuration
 1 round
Foes within the area are frightened 1 and unable to 
reduce it for as long as they remain in the area. 
DISAPPEARANCE SPELL 
8 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 10 minutesPolymorph
Transmutation
CantripCompositionEmotionEnchantmentFear
MentalAuditory
IllusionVisualThe target becomes invisible and is completely silent. This defeats 
all forms of blindsense and blindsight. DISCERN LIES
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 10 minutesYou gain a +4 conditional bonus to Perception vs. lies.
DISCERN LOCATION
 SPELL 
8 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range unlimited; Targets
 one creature or object
You discover the target's exact location by name (including the 
building, community, and country) and plane of existence.
You can target a creature only if you've seen it in person or have 
a signiflcant belonging or a piece of its body. To target an object, 
you must have touched it or have a fragment. 
Discern location overcomes lower-level protections against detection and divination.
DISINTEGRATE
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Targets
 one creature or unattended object
You fire a green ray at your target. Make a ranged touch attack. 
You deal 12d10 damage and the target must attempt a Fortitude 
save. On a critical hit, treat the save result as one degree worse. A 
creature reduced to 0 HP is reduced to flne powder; gear remains.
An object you hit is destroyed (no save), regardless of Hardness, 
unless it's an artifact or similarly hard to destroy. A single 
casting can destroy no more than a 10-foot cube of matter. This 
automatically destroys any force construct, such as a 
wall of force
.Success The target takes half damage. Failure
 The target takes full damage. Critical Failure
 The target takes double damageHeightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d10.
DISJUNCTION SPELL 
9 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Targets
 one magic itemCrackling energy disjoins the target. You attempt to dispel it. If 
you succeed, it's deactivated for 1 week. On a critical success, it's 
destroyed. If it's an artifact or similar item, you automatically fail.
DISPEL MAGIC
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Targets
 one spell effect or unattended magic item
Make a dispel attempt against the target (see page 197). If you 
succeed against a spell effect, you dispel it. If you succeed against 
a magic item, the item becomes a mundane item of its type for 10 
minutes. This doesn't change the item's quality. If the target is an 
artifact or similar item, you automatically fail.
DISRUPT UNDEAD
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one undead creature
You infuse the target with energy. You deal 1d10 positive damage; the 
target must attempt a Fortitude save. Heightening increases damage.
Success The target takes half damage. Divination
MentalRevelation
DetectionDivination 
Evocation
Abjuration
Abjuration
Necromancy
Positive
217 Critical Success The target takes no damage. Failure
 The target takes full damage. Critical Failure
 Double damage and enfeebled 1 for 1 round.
Heightened (3rd)
 1d10 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (5th) 2d10 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (7th) 3d10 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (9th) 4d10 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
DISRUPTING WEAPONS
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 up to two weapons, each of 
which must be unattended or wielded by you or a willing ally
Duration
 1 minuteTargets' attacks deal an extra 1d4 positive damage to undead.
Heightened (3rd)
 Target up to three weapons, 2d4 damage.
Heightened (5th) Target up to four weapons, 3d4 damage.
DIVINE AURA
 SPELL 
8 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 10-foot aura; Targets
 allies in the auraDuration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
Divine power wards the targets, granting a +1 conditional bonus to 
AC and saves while in the area.
Choose chaotic, evil, good, or lawful. If you choose chaos, this 
spell gains the lawful trait and so on. The bonuses increase to +2 
against attacks by creatures of the chosen alignment and effects 
created by such creatures. The bonuses increase to +4 against 
effects from such creatures that directly control the target and 
attacks made by summoned creatures of the chosen alignment.
When a creature of the chosen alignment hits a target with a 
melee attack, it must succeed at a Will save or be blinded for 1 
minute. It's bolstered against all 
divine auras
 for the duration.
The first time you Concentrate on the Spell each round, the 
radius grows 10 feet.
DIVINE DECREE
 SPELL 
7 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 40 feet; Area
 40-foot auraDuration
 varies
You utter potent words linked to your faith. Choose an alignment 
your deity has (chaotic, evil, good, or lawful). You can't cast this spell 
if you don't have a deity or your deity is true neutral. You deal 7d6 
damage to creatures of that alignment in the area; each creature 
must attempt a Will save. Creatures that match the alignment are 
unaffected. Those that neither match nor oppose it don't suffier 
effects other than damage and treat their result as one degree better.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected. 
Failure
 It takes full damage and is enfeebled 2 for 1 minute. Critical Failure
 It takes double damage and is enfeebled 2 for 1 
minute. A 10th-level creature or lower must attempt a second 
save. On a failure, it's paralyzed for 1 minute; on a critical failure, 
it dies. If you're on your home plane, a creature that critically 
fails is banished with the effect of a failed banishment save.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d6 and the level of 
creatures that must attempt a second save on a critical failure by 2.
Necromancy
Positive
Abjuration
Evocation
DIVINE INSPIRATION
 SPELL 
8 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one willing creature
You infuse a target with spiritual energy, refreshing its magic. If it 
prepares spells, it recovers one 6th-level or lower spell it previously 
cast today and can cast that spell again. If it spontaneously casts 
spells, it recovers one of its 6th-level or lower spell slots.
DIVINE VESSEL 
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting; 
Trigger
 You cast a non-
cantrip spell that targets a single ally.
Add one Somatic Casting action to the triggering spell. Its target 
gains a +1 conditional bonus to saves as long as the spell lasts 
and as long as you Concentrate on the Spell, to a maximum of 1 
minute. If the original spell already requires concentration, you can 
maintain the conditional bonus with the same action. DIVINE WARD
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting; 
Trigger
 An ally in 
range takes damage. Range 30 feetRedirect damage no more than twice your level to you. You take the 
damage instead of the triggering ally. Your immunities, resistances, 
weaknesses, and so on do not apply against the redirected damage. 
If the damaging effect applies enhancements or conditions, you 
aren't subject to either; your ally is still subject to enhancements 
and conditions even if you redirect all damage to you.
DIVINE WRATH
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Area
 20-foot burstChoose an alignment your deity has (chaotic, evil, good, or lawful). 
You can't cast this spell if you don't have a deity or your deity 
your deity is true neutral. You deal 4d8 damage of that alignment. 
Creatures that match the alignment are unaffected. Those that 
neither match nor oppose it treat their result as one degree better.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Critical Success The creature takes no damage.
Failure
 The creature takes full damage and is sick 1.
Critical Failure
 Full damage, sick 2, and slowed 1 while sick.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d8.
DIVINER'S SIGHT
 POWER 
1 Casting  Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one willing living creature
Duration
 end of your next turn or until dismissed
You glimpse into the target's future. Roll a d20. When the target 
attempts a Perception check, saving throw, or skill check, it can use 
the number you rolled instead of rolling, and the spell is dismissed. 
Casting it again dismisses any active 
diviner's sight
.DOMINATE
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one humanoid creature
Duration
 1 day, or until dismissed
You take command of the target, forcing it to obey your orders. 
EnchantmentMentalEnchantmentAbjuration
Evocation
Concentrate
Divination
Fortune 
EnchantmentMental 
218 If you issue an obviously self-destructive order, the target doesn't 
act until you issue a new order. The effect depends on its Will save.
Success Slowed 1 for 1 round as it fights offi your commands.
Critical Success The target is unaffected. Failure
 The target follows your orders but attempts a Will save at 
the end of each of its turns. On success, the spell is dismissed. Critical Failure
 As failure, but the target receives a new save 
only whenever you give it a new order, and even then only if 
the new order is against its nature, such as killing its allies.
Heightened (9th) You can target a non-humanoid creature.
DOWNPOUR
 POWER 
2 Casting  Verbal Casting, 
 Somatic Casting
Range 120 feet; Area
 20-foot burstDuration
 1 minuteYou call a torrential downpour. The rain extinguishes nonmagical 
flames. Creatures in the area are concealed and dazzled. They gain 
fire resistance 4. Creatures with weakness to water that end their 
turns in the area take damage equal to their weakness. 
Heightened (+1) The amount of fire resistance increases by 2.
DRAGON BREATH
 POWER 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 30-foot cone or 60-foot line originating from you
You spew energy from your mouth, dealing 5d6 damage. The 
area, damage type, and save depend on the dragon type in your 
bloodline. The spell gains the trait matching its damage type.
Dragon Type
Area and Damage Type
Saving Throw
Black or copper60-foot line of acidRefiex
Blue or bronze
60-foot line of electricityRefiex
Brass60-foot line of fire
Reflex
Green
30-foot cone of poisonFortitude
Gold or red
30-foot cone of fire
Reflex
Silver or white
30-foot cone of coldRefiex
Each creature in the area must attempt a save.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure
 The creature takes full damage.
Critical Failure
 The creature takes double damage.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d6.
DRAGON CLAWS
 POWER 
1 Casting  Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minuteVicious claws grow from your flngers. They are agile, flnesse 
unarmed attacks, and you're trained in them. They deal 1d4 
slashing damage and 1d4 damage of a type determined by the 
dragon in your bloodline. Scales also cover part of your body, 
giving you resistance 5 to the same damage type (see table above).
Heightened (3rd)
 The claws count as 
+1 magic, granting a +1 item 
bonus to attack rolls and adding a damage die; you gain 7 resistance.
Heightened (5th) The claws count as 
+2; you gain 10 resistance.
Heightened (7th) The claws count as 
+3; you gain 12 resistance.
Heightened (9th) The claws count as 
+4; you gain 15 resistance. 
Evocation
Water 
Evocation
MorphTransmutation
DRAGON FORM
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedYou transform into a Large dragon battle form. You must have 
space to expand or the spell is lost. You count as a dragon in 
addition to your normal traits. Your gear is absorbed into you; the 
constant abilities of your gear still function, but you can't activate 
it. When you transform, you gain the following:

Ł Blindsense 60 feet and darkvision.
Ł Athletics bonus of +20 unless your own bonus is higher.

Ł AC 27 (TAC 24), ignore armor's check penalty and reduced Speed.

Ł 10 temporary Hit Points while you have the form.

Ł Resistance 10 against the damage type of your breath weapon.

Ł Speed 40 feet and fiy Speed 100 feet.
Ł One or more natural melee attacks, which are the only types 
of attacks you can use. You're trained with them. Your attack 
modifier is +20 and your damage bonus is +6. These are 
Strength based (for the purposes of enfeebled, for example).

Ł You can activate a breath weapon by spending 2 actions. 
A creature that succeeds at a DC 24 saving throw takes half 
damage, or no damage on a critical success. The saving throw 
is a Reflex save unless stated otherwise in the special ability 
description below. Once activated, your breath weapon can't be 
used again for 1d4 rounds. Your breath weapon is an arcane 
evocation with the appropriate damage trait. The shape, 
damage, and damage type depend on your speciflc dragon form 
(see below).
These special statistics can be adjusted only by penalties, 
circumstance bonuses, and conditional bonuses. Your battle form 
prevents casting spells or taking most actions with the manipulate 
trait that require hands (the GM decides if there's doubt). You can 
dismiss the spell with an action (this action has the concentrate trait).
If you prepare this spell, choose from the following options. 
When in battle form, you gain the attacks, movement types, and 
special abilities listed below for the corresponding form:

Ł Black jaws, 
Damage 1d12 piercing plus 2d6 acid; claw (agile), 
Damage 2d10 slashing; tail (reach 10 feet), 
Damage 2d10 
bludgeoning; horns (reach 10 feet), 
Damage 2d8 piercing; swim 
60 feet; breath weapon 60-foot line, 11d6 acid.

Ł Blue burrow 20 feet; jaws, 
Damage 1d10 piercing plus 1d12 
electricity; claw (agile), 
Damage 2d10 slashing; tail (reach 10), 
Damage 2d10 bludgeoning; horns (reach 10), 
Damage 2d8 
piercing; breath weapon 80-foot line, 6d12 electricity.

Ł Green
 swim 40 feet, nonmagical foliage doesn't count as dificult 
terrain; jaws, 
Damage 1d12 piercing plus 2d6 poison; claw (agile), 
Damage 2d10 slashing; tail (reach 10), 
Damage 2d10 bludgeoning; 
horns (reach 10), 
Damage 2d8 piercing; breath weapon 30-foot 
cone, 10d6 poison (Fortitude save instead of Reflex).

Ł Red
 ignore concealed from smoke; jaws, 
Damage 1d12 piercing 
plus 2d6 fire; claw (agile), 
Damage 3d6 slashing; tail (reach 
10), Damage 2d10 bludgeoning; wing (reach 10), 
Damage 2d8 
bludgeoning; breath weapon 30-foot cone, 10d6 fire.

Ł White climb 25 feet on ice; jaws, 
Damage 2d6 piercing plus 2d6 
cold; claw (agile), 
Damage 2d10 slashing; tail (reach 10), 
Damage 2d10 bludgeoning; breath weapon 30-foot cone, 10d6 cold.

Ł Brass burrow 20 feet; jaws, 
Damage 2d8 piercing plus 2d4 fire; 
Polymorph
Transmutation
219claw (agile), 2d10 slashing; tail (reach 10 feet), 
Damage 2d10 
bludgeoning; spikes (reach 10 feet), 
Damage 2d8 piercing; 
breath weapon 60-foot line, 15d4 fire.

Ł Bronze
 swim 40 feet; jaws, 
Damage 1d10 piercing plus 1d12 
electricity; claw (agile), 
Damage 2d10 slashing; tail (reach 10 
feet), Damage 2d10 bludgeoning; wing (reach 10 feet), 
Damage 2d8 slashing; breath weapon 80-foot line, 6d12 electricity.

Ł Copper climb 25 feet on stone; jaws, 
Damage 1d12 piercing plus 
2d6 acid; claw (agile), 
Damage 2d10 slashing; tail (reach 10 feet), 
Damage 2d10 bludgeoning; wing (reach 10 feet), 
Damage 2d8 
bludgeoning; breath weapon 60-foot line, 10d6 acid.

Ł Gold swim 40 feet; jaws, 
Damage 1d12 piercing plus 2d6 fire; 
claw (agile), 
Damage 3d6 slashing; tail (reach 10 feet), 
Damage 2d10 bludgeoning; horns (reach 10 feet), 
Damage 2d8 piercing; 
breath weapon 30-foot cone, 6d10 fire.

Ł Silver
 walk on clouds; jaws, 
Damage 1d12 piercing plus 2d6 
cold; claw (agile), 
Damage 2d10 slashing; tail (reach 10), 
Damage 2d10 bludgeoning; breath weapon 30-foot cone, 8d8 cold.
Heightened (8th) Your battle form is Huge, your fiy Speed is 
accelerated 20, and your attacks have 10-foot reach (15 if they 
previously had 10). Your statistics are Athletics +26; AC 34 (TAC 30); 
15 temporary HP; attack modifier +26; damage bonus +12; breath 
weapon DC 30; +14 conditional bonus to breath weapon damage.
DRAGON WINGS
 POWER 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minuteLeathery wings sprout from your back, giving you a fiy Speed of 60 
feet. When the duration would end, if you have Spell Points, you can 
spend 1 Spell Point to increase the duration by 1 minute. When it 
ends, you fioat to the ground, with the effect of 
feather fall. If you have Spell Points, you can increase the cost by 1 Spell 
Point to gain the effects of 
dragon claws
 as long as the wings last.
Heightened (7th) The duration increases to 10 minutes. Spell 
Points increase the duration by 5 minutes.
DREAD AURA
 POWER 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 30-foot-radius aura centered on you
Duration
 1 round
You emit an aura of terror. Foes in the area are 
frightened 1 and unable to reduce the condition.
If you have Spell Points, you can spend 1 Spell Point to 
Concentrate on the Spell and extend its duration, for up to 1 minute.
DREAM COUNCIL
 SPELL 
8 Casting 10 minutes (Somatic, Verbal)
Range planetary; Targets
 up to 12 creatures you 
know by name and have met in person
Duration
 1 hourUpon Casting this Spell, any targets—including you—can choose to 
immediately fall asleep. The spell ends for any creatures that don't 
choose to fall asleep. Sleepers join a shared dream, where they can 
communicate with one another as though they were in the same 
room. Individual targets leave this shared dream upon awakening, 
and if all the targets awaken, the spell is dismissed. 
MorphTransmutation
EnchantmentEmotionFear
Mental 
IllusionMentalDREAM MESSAGE
 SPELL 
3 Casting 10 minutes (Somatic, Verbal)
Range planetary;
 Targets
 one creature you know by 
name and have met in person
Duration
 1 day or until dismissed
You send a message to your target's dream. The message is one-
way, up to 1 minute of speech (roughly 150 words). If the target 
is asleep, she receives the message instantly. If not, she receives 
it the next time she sleeps. As soon as she receives it, the spell is 
dismissed, and you know the message was sent.
Heightened (4th) You can target up to 10 creatures you know by 
name and have met in person. You must send the same message 
to all of them; the spell is dismissed for each creature individually.
DREAMING POTENTIAL 
 POWER 
2 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 one willing sleeping creature
Duration
 8 hoursYou draw the target into a lucid dream where it can explore 
the endless possibilities of its own potential within the ever-
changing backdrop of its dreamscape. If it sleeps the full 8 hours 
uninterrupted, when it wakes, it counts as having spent a day 
of downtime retraining, though it can't use 
dreaming potential 
for any retraining that would require either an instructor or 
specialized knowledge it can't access within the dream.
DROP DEAD
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting; 
Trigger
 A creature 
within range is hit by an attack from an enemy.
Range 120 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
The target appears to fall down dead, though it actually turns 
invisible. Its illusory corpse remains where it fell, complete with an 
appropriate fatal wound. This illusion looks and feels like a dead 
body. If the target's death seems absurd—for instance, a barbarian 
at full health appears to be slain by 2 damage—the GM can grant the 
attacker an immediate Perception check to disbelieve the illusion. 
If the target acts hostile, the spell is dismissed afterward. This 
ends the entire spell, so the illusory corpse disappears too.
Heightened (7th) The spell isn't dismissed if the target acts hostile.
DUPLICATE FOE
 SPELL 
7 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one enemy of level 16 or lower
Duration
 concentration, up to 1 minute or until dismissed
You try to create a temporary duplicate of an enemy. The target 
can attempt a Fortitude save to disrupt the spell. The duplicate 
appears in an unoccupied space adjacent to the target and has the 
target's attack modifier, AC, saving throw modifiers, Perception, 
and skill modifiers, but it has only 70 Hit Points and lacks the 
target's special abilities, including immunities, resistances, and 
weaknesses. It has no magic items except weapon potency runes.
The duplicate gains the minion trait, and it can only Stride 
and Strike. Its Strikes deal the target's normal damage but don't 
apply added effects, since it doesn't have special abilities. The 
EnchantmentMentalEnchantmentMentalIllusionVisualConjuration
220spell automatically ends if its HP drop to 0.
The duplicate attacks your enemies to the best of its abilities. 
You can attempt to command it as if you used Command a Minion 
as part of your action to Concentrate on the Spell, but the GM 
determines whether the creature follows your command.
The duplicate is imperfect, so each turn after it takes its 
actions, it loses 8d6 Hit Points. It's not a living creature, and it 
can never regain its lost Hit Points in any way.
Success The duplicate deals half damage with its Strikes and is 
destroyed at the end of the second round after it takes actions.
Critical Success You fail to create a duplicate.
Failure
 The duplicate works as described.
Heightened (+1) The level of creature you can target increases by 
2. The duplicate has 10 more HP and loses 1d6 more each turn.
EARTHBIND
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Targets
 one fiying creature
Duration
 varies (see below)
You hamper a target's flight, with effects based on its Fortitude save. 
If the creature reaches the ground, it doesn't take falling damage.
Success The target falls safely up to 120 feet. Critical Success The target is unaffected. Failure
 The target falls safely up to 120 feet. If it hits the ground, 
it can't Fly, 
levitate, or otherwise leave the ground for 1 round.
Critical Failure
 The target falls safely up to 120 feet.  If it hits the ground, it can't Fly, 
levitate, or otherwise leave the 
ground for 1 minute.
EARTHQUAKE
 SPELL 
8 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 500 feet; Area
 60-foot burstDuration
 1 round
You shake the ground, topple creatures, and shatter structures. 

Ł Shaking Ground
 The ground is dificult terrain, and creatures on 
it take a –2 circumstance penalty to attack rolls and skill checks.

Ł Fissures
 Each creature on the ground must attempt a Reflex 
save at the start of its turn to keep footing and avoid falling into 
40-foot-deep flssures that open. The flssures are permanent, 
and their walls require DC 15 Athletics to Climb.

Ł Collapse Structures and ceilings might collapse. The GM rolls 
a flat check for each (DC 16 for a sturdy structure, DC 14 for 
an average structure and most natural formations, DC 9 for 
a shoddy structure, or higher or lower as the GM sees fit). A 
collapse deals 11d6 bludgeoning damage; each creature caught 
in a collapse must attempt a Reflex save to escape it.
Success The creature takes Half collapse damage and falls prone.
Critical Success Half collapse damage. Failure
 Full collapse damage and falls prone.
Critical Failure
 Full collapse damage and falls into a flssure.
The GM might add additional effects in certain areas. Cliffis 
might collapse, causing creatures to fall, or a lake might drain as 
flssures open up below its surface, leaving a morass of quicksand. 
Heightened (10th)
 You create a massive earthquake that can 
devastate a settlement. The range increases to half a mile and the 
area to a quarter-mile burst.
Transmutation
EarthEvocation
ECHOING NIGHTMARE
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 see text
You create a nightmare conduit between your mind and the 
target, ensuring one of you is confused, depending on the 
target's Will save.
Success You are confused until the end of your next turn.
Critical Success You are confused for 1 minute.
Failure
 The target is confused for 3 rounds. It can attempt a 
new Will save at the end of each of its turns to end the effect.
Critical Failure
 The target is confused for 1 minute. ELECTRIC ARC
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one or two creatures
You deal 1d6 electricity damage; each target must 
attempt a Reflex save. Heightening increases damage.
Success The target takes half damage. Critical Success The target takes no damage. Failure
 The target takes full damage. Critical Failure
 The target takes double damage. Heightened (3rd)
 Damage of 1d6 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (5th) Damage of 2d6 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (7th) Damage of 3d6 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (9th) Damage of 4d6 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
ELEMENTAL FORM
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedYou transform into a Medium elemental battle form. 
You count as an elemental in addition to your normal traits. Your 
gear is absorbed into you; the constant abilities still function, but 
you can't activate it. When you transform, you gain the following:

Ł Darkvision.
Ł Acrobatics (air or fire) or Athletics (earth or water) bonus of +17; 
ignore this change if your own bonus is higher.

Ł AC 28 (TAC 26), ignore armor's check penalty and reduced Speed.

Ł 10 temporary Hit Points while you have the form.

Ł Resistance 5 to critical hits and precision damage.

Ł One or more natural melee attacks, which are the only types 
of attacks you can use. You're trained with them. Your attack 
modifier is +15 and your damage bonus is +9. These are 
Dexterity based (air or fire) or Strength based (earth or water). 
These special statistics can be adjusted only by penalties, 
circumstance bonuses, and conditional bonuses. Your battle form 
prevents casting spells or using most actions with the manipulate 
trait that require hands (the GM decides if there's doubt). You can 
dismiss the spell with a action (this action has the concentrate trait).
If you prepare this spell, choose from the options below. When 
in battle form, you gain the attacks, movement types, and special 
abilities listed.
Ł Air fiy Speed 80 feet, and movement doesn't trigger reactions; 
gust, Damage 1d4 bludgeoning.
Ł Earth Speed 20 feet, burrow Speed 20 feet; flst, 
Damage 2d10 
bludgeoning. 
EmotionEnchantmentMentalAttack
CantripElectricityEvocation
Polymorph
Transmutation
221
Ł Fire
 Speed 50 feet; fire resistance 10, weakness 5 to cold and 5 
to water; tendril, 
Damage 1d8 fire plus 1d4 persistent fire.

Ł Water
 Speed 20 feet, swim Speed 60 feet; fire resistance 5; 
wave, 
Damage 1d12 bludgeoning, and you can spend an action 
immediately after a hit to push the target 5 feet.
Heightened (6th) Your battle form is Large and your attacks have 
10-foot reach. You must have space to expand or the spell is lost. 
Your statistics are Acrobatics or Athletics +19, AC 31 (TAC 28); 15 
temporary HP; attack modifier +19; damage bonus +13.
Heightened (7th) Your battle form is Huge and your attacks have 
15-foot reach. You must have space to expand or the spell is lost. 
Your statistics are Acrobatics or Athletics +23; AC 34 (TAC 32); 20 
temporary HP; attack modifier +21; damage bonus +11 and double 
the number of damage dice (including persistent damage).ELEMENTAL TEMPEST
 POWER 
4 Casting  Verbal Casting; 
Trigger
 You cast an 
evocation wizard spell that deals acid, cold, electricity, or fire damage.
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedYou emit light like a torch. If hit by an attack from an adjacent foe, 
you can use a reaction to deal 1d8 damage per level of the triggering 
spell. The damage type is the same as that of the triggering spell, 
and the spell gains that trait (choose one if the triggering spell 
deals multiple eligible types). This dismisses the spell. Heightened (6th) The damage is 2d8 per triggering spell level.
EMPTY BODY
 POWER 
9 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minuteYou turn ethereal as 
ethereal jaunt
 but don't need to concentrate.
ENDURE ELEMENTS
 SPELL 
2 Casting 10 minutes (Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 one willing creature
Duration
 1 day
Choose severe cold or heat. The target is protected from the 
temperature you chose (but not extreme cold or heat).
Heightened (3rd)
 The target is protected from severe cold and heat.
Heightened (5th) The target is protected from severe cold, severe 
heat, extreme cold, and extreme heat.
ENDURING MIGHT
 POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting; 
Trigger
 An attack or 
effect would deal you damage. 
You gain resistance to all of that attack's damage equal to your 
level plus your Strength modifier.
ENERGY ABSORPTION
 POWER 
4 Casting  Verbal Casting; 
Trigger
 An effect deals 
acid, cold, electricity, or fire damage to you.
You gain resistance 10 to acid, cold, electricity, or fire damage 
from the triggering effect (one type of your choice). The resistance 
applies only to the triggering effect's initial damage.
Heightened (3rd)
 The resistance increases to 15.
Heightened (6th) The resistance increases to 20.
Heightened (8th) The resistance increases to 25.
Evocation
Conjuration
Teleportation
Abjuration
Abjuration
Abjuration
ENERGY AEGIS
 SPELL 
7 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 24 hours
You protect the target with a powerful, long-lasting barrier. It gains 
resistance 5 to acid, cold, electricity, fire, force, and sonic.
Heightened (9th) The resistances increase to 10.
ENERVATION
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minuteMake a ranged touch attack. If you succeed, the effect depends on 
the target's Fortitude save; if you critically succeed, treat the result 
as one degree worse. Enervated effects last for only the duration.
Success The target is enervated 1.
Critical Success The target is unaffected. Failure
 The target is enervated 2.
Critical Failure
 The target is enervated 4.
ENHANCE VICTUALS
 POWER 
1 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 1 nonmagical pint of water or pound of food
You transform the target into delicious fare, changing water into 
wine or another flne beverage or enhancing food's taste and 
ingredients to make it a gourmet treat. The transformation also 
attempts to counteract toxins in the food or water. If you have Spell 
Points, you can add an additional pint or pound for each additional 
Spell Point you spend. The feast vanishes if not consumed.
Heightened (+1) Initial and additional pints or pounds increase by 1.
ENLARGE SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one willing creature
Duration
 1 minuteThe target grows to size Large. Its equipment grows with it but 
returns to natural size if removed. The creature is sluggish 1. Its 
reach increases by 5 feet (or by 10 feet if it started out Tiny) and 
it gains a +2 conditional bonus to melee damage. This spell has no 
effect on a Large or larger creature.
Heightened (4th) The creature instead grows to size Huge. The  
conditional bonus to melee damage is +4 and reach increases by 
10 feet (or 15 feet if the creature started out Tiny). The spell has no 
effect on a Huge or larger creature.
Heightened (6th) As level 4, but you can target up to 10 creatures.
ENTANGLE 
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Area
 squares in a 20-foot-radius 
burst that contain plants
Duration
 1 minutePlants in the area entangle creatures. Each round a creature starts 
its turn in the area, it must attempt a Reflex save. On a failure, it is 
entangled until it leaves the area, and on a critical failure, it is also 
immobile for 1 round. Creatures can attempt Acrobatics or Athletics 
checks at 
entangle's DC to remove these effects. 
Abjuration
Attack
Necromancy
Negative
Transmutation
Polymorph
Transmutation
PlantTransmutation
222 ENTHRALL SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Targets
 creatures in range
Duration
 concentration, up to 10 minutes
You speak or sing without interruption throughout the casting and 
duration. Targets that notice your speech or song might give their 
undivided attention, depending on their Will saves. The GM may 
grant a circumstance bonus (to a maximum of +4) if the target is of 
an opposing religion, ancestry, or political leaning, or is otherwise 
unlikely to agree with what you're saying.
Each creature that enters range has to attempt a save when 
you Concentrate on the Spell. If you're speaking, 
enthrall
 is lingual. Success The target needn't pay attention but doesn't notice you 
tried to use magic (it might notice others are enthralled).
Critical Success The target is unaffected. Failure
 The target is fascinated with you. It can attempt a Will 
save if it witnesses actions or speech with which it disagrees. 
If it succeeds, it's no longer fascinated and bolstered to this 
casting of enthrall
. The fascination ends instantly if the 
creature is subject to a hostile act or a successful Diplomacy 
or Intimidation check against the spell's DC.
Critical Failure
 As failure, but the target can't attempt a save to 
end the fascination if it disagrees with you.
ETHEREAL JAUNT
 SPELL 
7 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
You travel to the Ethereal Plane, which overlaps the Material Plane. 
Material Plane creatures can't see you and you can move through 
things on the Material Plane. You move at half your normal Speeds, 
but can move in any directions (including up and down).
You can see onto the Material Plane within a radius of 60 feet; it 
is gray, hazy, and concealed from you. You can't affect the Material 
Plane, and you can't be affected by the Material Plane except by 
force effects and abjurations. 
When the spell ends, you return to the Material Plane. If you're 
in the air, you fall (unless you can fiy), and if you're inside an object, 
you're pushed into the nearest open space and take 1d6 damage 
per 5 feet you were pushed.
If you cast this spell when not on the Material Plane, it is lost.
Heightened (9th) You can target up to flve additional willing 
creatures at a range of 30 feet. The maximum duration is 10 minutes.
FABRICATE
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
 Duration
 1 minuteYou create a temporary standard-quality object. It must be 
of vegetable matter and 1 Bulk or less. It can't rely on intricate 
craftsmanship or complex moving parts, never functions as a cost 
or the like, and can't be made of special materials or materials with 
a rarity of uncommon or higher. It is obviously temporary conjured, 
and its aesthetic matches your style of craftsmanship or artistry.
FABRICATED TRUTH
 SPELL 
10
Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Auditory
EnchantmentEmotionConjuration
Teleportation
Conjuration
EnchantmentMentalRange 100 feet; Targets
 up to 5 creatures
Duration
 varieSCHoose a single fact you want all targets to believe. Their experiences 
color how they react to this "truth" and how their behavior changes. 
If the fact changes what they perceive, they treat the change as a 
sudden revelation. The fact could be narrow, such as "a dragon is 
circling overhead and wants to kill me"; wide-reaching, such as "all 
humanoids are disguised abominations"; or conceptual, such as "if I 
don't live a kinder life, I'll be punished in the afterlife."
The effect depends on the targets' Will saves. If a target is 
already subject to 
fabricated truth, your spell tries to dispel it. If 
the check fails, the target can't get an outcome worse than success.
Success It doesn't believe the fact or realize you tried to trick it.
Critical Success As success, but it knows you tried to trick it.
Failure
 It believes the fact for a duration of 1 week.
Critical Failure
 It believes the fact with unlimited duration.
FACE IN THE CROWD
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
 Duration
 1 minuteYou cause yourself to blend into a crowd. While within a crowd of 
roughly similar creatures, you are concealed, gain a +2 conditional 
bonus to Deception and Stealth checks to go unnoticed among 
the crowd, and ignore dificult terrain caused by the crowd. 
FAERIE DUST
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Area
 5-foot burstDuration
 1 round
Sparkling magical dust fllls the spell's area, making those within 
drowsy. Each creature in the area must attempt a Will save.
Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure
 The creature can't use reactions and takes a –2 
conditional penalty to Perception checks.
Critical Failure
 The target falls asleep. It automatically awakens 
when the spell ends. FAERIE FIRE
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Area
 10-foot burstDuration
 1 minuteAll creatures in the area are limned in colorful, heatless fire of a 
color of your choice. Visible creatures can't be concealed while 
affected by 
faerie fire
. If the creatures are invisible, they are 
concealed while affected by 
faerie fire, rather than being unseen.
FALSE LIFE
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 day
You gain a number of temporary Hit Points equal to 6 plus your 
spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (+2) The temporary Hit Points increase by 6.
FALSE VISION
 SPELL 
5 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Area
 100-foot burstIllusionVisual 
EnchantmentMentalEvocation
LightNecromancy
Illusion223 Duration
 24 hours
Any scrying spell sees, hears, smells, and otherwise detects 
whatever you wish within the area, rather than what is actually in 
the area. You can Concentrate on the Spell each round to change the 
illusion as you desire, including playing out a complex scene. If the 
scrying spell is of a higher level than 
false vision, you can attempt 
a Perception check to disbelieve the illusion, though even if you're 
successful, you can't learn what's truly going on in the area.
FATAL ARIA
 POWER 
10
Casting  Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
You perform music so perfect that the target dies of 
joy or sorrow. Once targeted, the target is bolstered 
against all castings of fatal aria
. The effect of the spell 
depends on the target's level and current Hit Points.
16th or Lower
 The target dies instantly.
17th If the target has 50 Hit Points or fewer, it dies instantly; 
otherwise, the target drops to 0 Hit Points and gains dying 
1 or, if it's already dying, increases its dying condition by 1.
18th or Higher The target takes 50 damage. If this brings it to 0 
Hit Points, it dies instantly.
FEAR SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 varies
You plant fear in the target, with effects based on 
its Will save.
CompositionDeath
EmotionEnchantmentMentalPower 
EmotionEnchantmentFear
MentalSuccess The target is frightened 1.Critical Success The target is unaffected. Failure
 The target is frightened 2.Critical Failure
 The target is frightened 3 and fieeing for 1 round.
Heightened (3rd)
 You can target up to flve creatures. FEATHER FALL
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Verbal Casting; 
Trigger
 A creature 
within range is falling. Range 60 feet; Targets
 one falling creature
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedThe target's fall slows to 60 feet per round, and the portion of 
the fall during the spell's duration doesn't count when calculating 
falling damage. If the target reaches the ground while the spell is 
in effect, it takes no damage from the fall. The spell is dismissed 
as soon as the target lands. FEEBLEMIND SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one humanoid creature
Duration
 varies
You drastically reduce the target's mental faculties. The effect 
depends on the target's Will save.
Success The target is stupefled 2 for 1 round.
Critical Success The target is unaffected. Failure
 The target is stupefled 4 with a permanent duration.
Critical Failure
 The target's intellect is permanently reduced 
below that of an animal, and it treats its Charisma, 
Intelligence, and Wisdom modifiers as –5. It loses all 
Abjuration
CurseEnchantmentMental224class abilities that require mental faculties, including all 
spellcasting. If the target is a PC, she becomes an NPC under the GM's control.
Heightened (9th) You can target a non-humanoid creature.
FEET TO FINS
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one willing creature
Duration
 10 minutesThe target's feet transform into flns, improving mobility in the 
water but reducing it on land. The target gains a swim Speed 
equal to its land Speed. Its land Speed then becomes 5 feet. FEY DISAPPEARANCE
 POWER 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 round
You can ignore natural dificult terrain (such as underbrush). Once 
this spell comes into effect, you can immediately Step or Stride.
If you have a pool of Spell Points, you can increase the cost 
of fey disappearance
 by 2 Spell Points to also turn invisible for 
the spell's duration, before taking your Step or Stride. Acting in a 
hostile manner doesn't dismiss this invisibility.
FIELD OF LIFE 
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Area
 20-foot burstDuration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
A fleld of positive energy fllls the area, exuding warmth and 
rejuvenating those within. Each living creature that starts its 
turn in the area regains 1d4 Hit Points, and any undead creature 
that starts its turn in the area takes 1d4 positive damage.
Heightened (9th) The healing and damage increase to 1d6.
FIERY BODY
 SPELL 
7 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minuteYou become living flame, giving you fire immunity, 
resistance 10 to precision damage, and weakness 5 to cold and 
to water. Any creature that touches you or damages you with an 
unarmed attack or non-reach melee weapon takes 3d6 fire damage.
Your unarmed attacks deal 1d4 additional fire damage, and 
your fire spells deal one additional die of fire damage (of the 
same damage die the spell uses). You can cast 
produce flame
 as 
an innate spell with a single Somatic Casting action.
In fire form, you have a fiy Speed of 40 feet and don't need 
to breathe.
Heightened (9th) You have resistance 15 to precision damage, 
creatures touching you take 4d6 fire damage instead of 3d6, 
your unarmed attacks deal 2d4 fire damage, and you have a fiy 
Speed of 60 feet. FINGER OF DEATH
 SPELL 
7 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one living creature
You point your flnger toward the target and speak 
a word of slaying. You deal 50 negative damage to the target, and 
MorphTransmutation
EnchantmentHealingNecromancy
Positive
Fire
Polymorph
Transmutation
Death
Necromancy
the target must attempt a Fortitude save. If the damage from 
finger 
of death reduces the target to 0 Hit Points, the target dies instantly.
Success The target takes half damage. Critical Success The target is unaffected. Failure
 The target takes full damage. Critical Failure
 The target dies instantly.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 10.
FIRE RAY
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 60 feet; Targets
 one creature or object
Attempt a ranged touch Strike against the target. If you succeed 
at the attack, you deal fire damage to the target equal to 1d6 plus 
your spellcasting ability modifier. 
Heightened (+1) The ray's damage increases by 1d6.
FIRE SEEDS
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minuteFour acorns grow in your hand, their shells streaked 
with red patterns. You or anyone else who has one of the acorns 
can toss it up to 30 feet with an action that has the manipulate 
trait. It explodes in a 5-foot burst, dealing 4d6 fire damage, and 
each creature in the area must attempt a Reflex save. The save 
uses your spell DC, even if someone else throws the acorn.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure
 The creature takes full damage.
Critical Failure
 The creature takes double damage.
Flames continue to burn on the ground in the burst for 
1 minute, dealing 2d6 fire damage to any creature that enters the 
flames or ends its turn within them. A creature can take damage 
from the continuing flames only once per round, even if it's in 
overlapping areas of fire created by diffierent acorns.
When the spell ends, any remaining acorns rot and turn to 
ordinary soil.
Heightened (8th) The burst damage increases to 5d6 and the 
continuing flames damage increases to 3d6.
Heightened (9th) The burst damage increases to 6d6 and the 
continuing flames damage increases to 3d6.
FIRE SHIELD
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minuteYou wreathe yourself in flames, gaining cold resistance 5. 
Additionally, adjacent creatures that hit you with a melee attack, 
as well as creatures that touch you or hit you with an unarmed 
attack, take 2d6 fire damage each time they do.
Heightened (+2) The cold resistance increases by 5 and the fire 
damage increases by 1d6.
FIREBALL
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 500 feet; Area
 20-foot burstA burst of fire explodes, dealing 6d6 fire damage; 
creatures in the area must attempt a Reflex save.
Evocation
Fire
Evocation
Fire
PlantEvocation
Fire
Evocation
Fire
225 Success The creature takes half damage.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure
 The creature takes full damage.
Critical Failure
 The creature takes double damage.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
FLAME BARRIER
 POWER 
2 Casting  Verbal Casting; 
Trigger
 An effect deals fire damage to either you or an ally within range. 
Range 60 feetYou or one ally gains fire resistance from the triggering effect 
equal to twice your level. The resistance applies only against 
damage you take from the triggering attack, not to any 
enhancements or conditions. FLAME STRIKE
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Area
 10-foot radius, 40-foot-tall 
cylinderYou call a rain of divine fire that plummets down from above, 
dealing 8d6 fire damage. Each creature in the area must attempt 
a Reflex save. Because the flame is infused with divine energy, 
creatures in the area apply only half their usual fire resistance. 
Creatures that are immune to fire treat their result on the saving 
throw as one degree of success better instead of gaining the 
usual benefit of immunity.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure
 The creature takes full damage.
Critical Failure
 The creature takes double damage.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
FLAMING SPHERE
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Area
 one 5-foot square
Duration
 concentration or until dismissed (see below)
You create a sphere of flame in a square within range. The sphere 
deals 3d6 fire damage to each creature in the sphere's square; 
each creature must attempt a Reflex save. Once per round when 
you Concentrate on this Spell, you can direct the sphere to roll 
to a spot within range and deal 3d6 fire damage; each creature 
in that square must attempt a Reflex save. You can't Concentrate 
on the Spell to move the sphere during the round you create it.
Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure
 The creature takes full damage.
Critical Failure
 The creature takes double damage.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d6.
FLEET STEP
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minuteYou are accelerated 30, but this applies only to your Speed.
FLESH TO STONE
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Targets
 one creature made of flesh
Abjuration
Fire
Evocation
Fire
Evocation
Fire
Transmutation
Transmutation
Duration
 varies
You attempt to turn the target's flesh into stone. The target must 
attempt a Fortitude save.
Success The target is slowed 1 for 1 round.
Critical Success The target is unaffected. Failure
 The target is slowed 1 and must attempt a Fortitude 
save at the end of each of its turns. On a failed save, the 
slowed condition increases by 1; on a critically failed save, 
it increases by 2. A successful save reduces the slowed 
condition by 1. If the slowed condition is reduced to 0 or 
otherwise ends, the spell ends. When a creature is unable 
to act due to the slowed condition from 
flesh to stone, the spell ends but the creature is petrifled permanently.
Critical Failure
 As failure, but the creature is initially slowed 2.
FLOATING DISK
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 hour or until dismissedA disk of magical energy materializes adjacent to you. This disk 
is 2 feet in diameter and follows 5 feet behind you automatically, 
fioating just above the ground. It holds up to 5
 Bulk of objects 
(though they must be able to fit and balance on its surface). 
Any objects atop a fioating disk fall to the ground when the 
spell ends. The disk is dismissed if a creature tries to ride atop it, if anyone 
tries to lift or force the disk higher above the ground, or if you 
move more than 30 feet away from the disk (such as by Flying or 
Climbing above the ground).
FLY
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minuteThe target gains a fiy Speed of 30 feet. Heightened (7th) The duration increases to 1 hour.
FORBIDDING WARD 
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one ally and one enemyDuration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
You ward your ally against the attacks and hostile spells of 
the target enemy. The target ally gains a +1 conditional bonus 
to Armor Class and saving throws against the target enemy's 
attacks, spells, and other effects.
Heightened (6th) The conditional bonus increases to +2.
FORCE BOLT
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature or object
You fire a dart of force from your flngertips. Make 
a ranged touch attack against the target to deal force damage 
equal to 1d4 plus your spellcasting ability modifier.
Success The target takes full damage. Critical Success The target takes double damage. Failure
 The target is unaffected. Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d4.
Conjuration
Transmutation
Abjuration
CantripAttack
Evocation
Force 
226 FORCED QUIET 
 POWER 
1 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
 Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 see text
You quiet the target's voice, preventing it from giving away 
valuable secrets. This doesn't prevent the target from talking or 
performing Verbal Casting actions, but no creature more than 10 
feet away can hear its croaking whispers without a successful 
Perception check against 
forced quiet'
s DC, which might interfere 
with auditory or lingual effects as well as communication. The 
duration depends on the target's Fortitude save, and the target is 
bolstered against your 
forced quiet
.Success The effect's duration is 1 round
Critical Success The target is unaffected. Failure
 The effect's duration is 1 minute
Critical Failure
 The effect's duration is 10 minutes.
FORESIGHT SPELL 
9 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 hourYou gain a sixth sense that warns you of danger that might 
befall the target of the spell. If you choose a creature other than 
yourself as the target, you create a psychic link through which 
you can inform the target of danger. This link is a mental effect. 
While foresight
 is in effect, the target gains a +2 conditional 
bonus to initiative rolls and can't be flat-footed. In addition, you 
gain the following reaction.
 Foresight
 Trigger:
 The target of foresight
 defends against a 
hostile creature or other danger. 
Efiect: The target rolls two dice and 
uses the higher result if it's being forced to roll (like with a saving 
throw), or the attacker or danger must roll twice and use the lower 
result (like with an attack or skill check). This is a fortune effect if the 
target is rolling twice, or a misfortune effect if the hostile force is.
Due to the amount of information this spell requires you to 
process, you can't have more than one 
foresight
 spell in effect at 
a time. Casting foresight
 again dismisses the previous 
foresight
.FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature touched
Duration
 1 minuteWhile under this spell's effect, the target ignores all effects that 
would entangle or hamper her. When she attempts to escape 
an effect that has her immobilized, grabbed, or restrained, she 
automatically succeeds unless it's a magical effect of a higher 
level than the 
freedom of movement
 spell. GASEOUS FORM
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one willing creature
Duration
 1 minuteThe target transforms into a vaporous state. In this state, the 
target is amorphous and loses any item bonus to AC. It gains 
resistance 8 to physical damage and is immune to precision 
damage. It can't cast spells or use actions that have the attack 
Abjuration
Divination
MentalPrediction
Abjuration
Polymorph
Transmutation
or manipulate trait. It gains a fiy Speed of 10 feet and can slip 
through tiny cracks.
GATE
 SPELL 
10
Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feetDuration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
You tear open a rift to another plane, creating a portal that 
creatures can use to travel both ways for the duration. This 
portal is vertical and circular, with a radius of 40 feet. The gate 
appears at a location of your choice on the destination plane, 
assuming you have a clear idea of both the destination's location 
on the plane and what the destination looks like. If you attempt 
to create a gate into or out of the realm of deity or another 
powerful being, that being can prevent the gate from forming.
GENTLE REPOSE
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one corpseDuration
 1 day
The corpse doesn't decay, nor can it be transformed into an 
undead. Time spent under the effect of this spell doesn't count 
when determining the success of spells that require a fresh corpse.
Heightened (5th) The spell's duration is permanent, but you must 
add a Material Casting action during which you expend 6
 gp worth of embalming fiuid as a cost.
GHOST SOUND 
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feetDuration
 concentration
You create simple sounds up to a maximum volume of four normal 
humans shouting, emanating from a square you designate within 
range. You can't create intelligible words or other intricate sounds.
Heightened (3rd)
 The range increases to 60 feet.
Heightened (5th) The range increases to 120 feet.
GHOSTLY WEAPON
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one nonmagical weapon that is either 
unattended or wielded by you or a willing ally
Duration
 1 minuteThe target weapon becomes translucent and ghostly, and can affect 
material and incorporeal creatures and objects. It can be wielded by 
a corporeal or incorporeal creature and counts as 
ghost touch. GHOULISH CRAVINGS
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
You touch the target to aflict it with ghoul fever; 
the target must attempt a Fortitude save.
Success The target takes a –2 conditional penalty to saving 
throws against ghoul fever for 1 day or until she contracts 
it, whichever comes first.
Critical Success unaffectedFailure
 The target is aflicted with ghoul fever at stage 1.
Conjuration
Teleportation
Necromancy
Auditory
CantripIllusionTransmutation
Attack
DiseaseEvil
Necromancy
227 Critical Failure
 The target is aflicted with ghoul fever at stage 2.
Ghoul Fever 
(disease) Level
 3; Stage 1 carrier with no ill effect (1 
day); 
Stage 2 3d8 damage and regains half as many Hit Points 
from all healing (1 day); 
Stage 3 as stage 2 (1 day); 
Stage 4 3d8 
damage and gains no benefit from healing (1 day); 
Stage 5 as stage 
4 (1 day); 
Stage 6 dead, and rises as a ghoul at the next midnight.
GLIMPSE THE TRUTH
 POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting
Duration
 1 round
You see things within 30 feet as they truly are. The GM attempts 
a special secret dispel check against any illusion in the area, but 
only for the purpose of determining whether you see through it (for 
instance, if the check succeeds against an illusory disguise spell, you 
see the creature's true form but it doesn't end the 
illusory disguise).GLITTERDUST SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Area
 10-foot burstCreatures in the area are outlined by glittering dust, with an effect 
depending on their Reflex save results. If a creature has its invisibility 
negated by this spell, it is concealed instead of invisible. This applies 
both if the creature was already invisible and if it benefits from new 
invisibility effects before the invisibility negation effect runs out.
Success The target's invisibility is negated for 1 round.
Critical Success The target is unaffected. Failure
 The target is dazzled for 1 minute and its invisibility is negated for 1 minute.
Critical Failure
 The target is blinded for 1 round and dazzled 
for 1 minute. Its invisibility is negated for 1 minute.
GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 10-foot burst centered on one corner of your space
Duration
 1 minuteYou create an immobile globe around you that attempts to dispel 
any spell from outside the globe whose area or targets enter into 
the globe, as if the globe were a 
dispel magic spell 1 level lower 
than its actual spell level. Even if the dispel attempt succeeds, it 
prevents only the portion of the spell that would have entered the 
globe (so if the spell also had targets outside the globe or part of 
its area were beyond the globe, those targets or area would still 
be affected normally). You must form the sphere in an unbroken 
open space so its edges don't pass through any creatures or 
objects or the spell is lost (though creatures can enter the area 
afterward normally).
GLUTTON'S JAWS
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minuteYour mouth transforms into a shadowy maw bristling with pointed 
teeth. These jaws grant you an unarmed attack you're trained in, 
dealing 1d6 piercing damage. They have the flnesse trait. 
Attacks with your jaws have the following enhancement.
Enhancement If the target was living, gain 1d4 temporary HP.
Heightened (2nd) Your jaws gain the effects of a 
+1 weapon 
Divination
Evocation
Abjuration
Necromancy
potency rune (a +1 item bonus to attack rolls and an additional 
damage die) and the temporary Hit Points increase to 2d4.
Heightened (4th) The jaws gain the effects of a 
+2 weapon 
potency rune and the temporary Hit Points increase to 3d4.
Heightened (6th) The jaws gain the effects of a 
+3 weapon 
potency rune and the temporary Hit Points increase to 4d4.
Heightened (8th) The jaws gain the effects of a 
+4 weapon 
potency rune and the temporary Hit Points increase to 5d4.
GLYPH OF WARDING
 SPELL 
3 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 one container or 10-foot-by-10-foot area
Duration
 unlimited until dismissedWhile Casting this Spell, you also Cast a Spell of a lower spell level 
to stored in the glyph. The stored spell must take 3 actions or 
fewer to cast, have a hostile effect, and target one creature or have 
an area. You can set the glyph with a password, a trigger stimulus, 
or both. Any creature that opens the target container or enters the 
target area without speaking the password or matching the trigger 
stimulus activates the glyph, releasing the harmful spell within. 
Once a spell is stored in the glyph, the glyph gains all the traits 
of that spell. If the spell targets one or more creatures, it targets the 
creature that set offi the glyph. If the spell has an area, that area is 
centered on the creature that set offi the glyph. 
Glyph of warding's 
duration ends when the glyph is triggered. The glyph counts as a 
magical trap, using your spell DC for both the Perception check to 
notice it and the Thievery check to disable it; both checks require 
the creature attempting them to be trained in order to succeed.
You can dismiss 
glyph of warding
 with a Verbal Casting action. 
The maximum number of glyphs of warding 
you can have active at 
a time is equal to your spellcasting ability modifier.
GOBLIN POX 
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Your touch aflicts the target with goblin pox. The 
effect is based on the result of the target's Fortitude save. 
Success The target is sick 1.Critical Success The target is unaffected. 
Failure
 The target is aflicted with goblin pox at stage 1.
Critical Failure
 The target is aflicted with goblin pox at stage 2.
Goblin Pox 
(disease) Level
 1. Goblins and goblin dogs are immune. 
Stage 1 sick 1 (1 round); 
Stage 2 sick 1 and slowed 1 (1 round); 
Stage 3 sick 1 and can't reduce its sick value below 1 (1 day)
GOODBERRY
 POWER 
1 Casting 10 minutes (Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 one freshly-picked berry
Duration
 1 day
You imbue the target berry with the bounty of nature, allowing 
it to heal and sustain far beyond its normal capacity. A living 
creature that eats the berry with an Interact action gains as much 
nourishment as a square meal for a typical human and regains 1d4 
Hit Points plus your spellcasting ability modifier. If not consumed 
during the duration, the berry withers away. 
Heightened (+1) You can target an additional berry.
Abjuration
Attack
DiseaseNecromancy
HealingNecromancy
228 GRIM TENDRILS
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 30-foot lineBlack shadows curl out from your flngertips and race through 
the air, taking the form of ephemeral vines spiked with thorns. 
You deal 2d4 negative damage and 1 persistent bleed damage 
to living creature in the line, depending on their Fortitude saves.
Success The creature takes half negative damage and no bleed.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure
 The creature takes full damage.
Critical Failure
 Double negative and persistent bleed damage.
Heightened (+1) 
The negative damage increases by 2d4 and the 
persistent bleed damage increases by 1.
GREASE SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet;
 Targets
 one object of 1 Bulk or less or 
Area
 four contiguous 5-foot squares
Duration
 1 minuteYou conjure greasy goo, with effects based on your target.

Ł Target an Area
 Each creature within the area must attempt 
an Acrobatics check to Maintain Balance against your spell 
DC. Creatures later entering a square within the area must 
also attempt an Acrobatics check to Balance. A creature that 
takes a Step doesn't have to Balance.

Ł Target an Object
 If you cast the spell on an unattended 
object, those trying to pick up the object must succeed at an 
Acrobatics check against your spell DC to do so. If you target an 
attended object, the creature that has the object must attempt 
an Acrobatics check. On a failure, the holder or wielder takes 
a –2 circumstance penalty to any attack roll or to any check 
attempted that involves using the object; on a critical failure, 
the holder or wielder drops the item. The object lands in an 
adjacent square of the GM's choice. If the object is worn, the 
wearer gains a +2 circumstance bonus to Fortitude saving 
throws against attempts to grapple or shove them.
GUIDANCE 
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 until the start of your next turn or until dismissed
You ask for divine guidance, granting the target a +1 conditional 
bonus to one attack roll, Perception check, saving throw, or skill 
check the target attempts before the duration ends. The target 
chooses which roll to use the bonus on before rolling. If the target 
uses the bonus, the spell ends. Either way, it's bolstered.
GUST OF WIND
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 60-foot lineDuration
 until the start of your next turn
A violent wind issues forth from your outstretched palm, blowing 
from the point where you are when you cast the spell to the 
line's opposite end. The wind extinguishes small nonmagical fires, 
disperses fog and mist, blows around objects of light Bulk or less, 
and pushes larger objects. Large or smaller creatures in the area 
Necromancy
Negative
Conjuration
CantripDivination
AirEvocation
must attempt a Fortitude save. Large or smaller creatures that 
move into the gust later must attempt the save on entering.
Success The creature can't move against the wind.
Critical Success Unaffected. Failure
 Knocked prone. If it was fiying, it suffiers the effects of 
critical failure instead.
Critical Failure
 Pushed 30 feet in the wind direction, knocked 
prone, and takes 2d6 bludgeoning damage.
HALLUCINATION
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 hourThe target consistently believes one thing is another, can't detect 
something that's there, or detects something that's not there. You 
choose which of these options applies and determine the speciflcs 
of the hallucination. For example, you could make the target think 
all elves are humans, be unable to detect the presence of his 
brother, think his beloved pocket watch is always on his person 
even when it isn't, or believe there's a tower in the center of town.
The target can attempt a Will save to disbelieve the hallucination 
every time he Seeks or Interacts with the subject of the hallucination. 
For example, the target could attempt to disbelieve each time he 
encountered an elf, bumped into his brother accidentally, tried to 
check his pocket watch, or studied the tower to spot vulnerabilities. 
The target can attempt to disbelieve with a large circumstance 
bonus in circumstances determined by the GM, such as if the target 
attempted to climb the nonexistent tower.
Heightened (6th) Choose Duration
 1 day or 
Targets
 up to 10 creatures.
Heightened (8th) Choose Duration
 unlimited or Targets
 any number 
of creatures.
HALLUCINATORY TERRAIN
 SPELL 
4 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range 500 feet; Area
 50-foot burstDuration
 24 hours
You create an illusion that causes natural terrain to look, sound, 
feel, and smell like a diffierent kind of terrain. This doesn't 
disguise any structures or creatures in the area.
Any creature that touches the illusion or uses the Seek action 
to examine it can attempt to disbelieve your illusion.
Heightened (5th)
 Your image can also disguise structures or 
create illusory structures (but still doesn't disguise creatures).
HAND OF THE APPRENTICE
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets 
one creature
You hurl a held melee weapon at the target, making a ranged Strike 
using your proficiency with the weapon or with spells, whichever 
is worse. Add your spellcasting ability modifier to damage, rather 
than your Strength modifier. Whether the attack succeeds or fails, 
the weapon fiies back to you and returns to your hand.
HARM SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting or more
Range touch, Range 30 feet, or Area
 30-foot aura IllusionMentalIllusionAttack
Evocation
Necromancy
Negative
229(see text);
 Targets
 one living creature or willing undead creature
You channel negative energy to harm the living or heal the undead. 
You restore Hit Points equal to 1d8 plus your spellcasting ability 
modifier to a willing undead target, or deal that amount of negative 
damage to a living target. The number of actions spent Casting this 
Spell determines its targets, range, area, and other parameters.

Ł  Somatic Casting
 The spell has a range of touch. You must 
succeed at a melee touch attack to damage a living target.

Ł  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
 The spell has a range 
of 30 feet and doesn't require a touch attack when targeting 
a living creature. A living target must attempt a Fortitude 
save, taking half damage on a success, no damage on a critical 
success, or double damage on a critical failure.

Ł  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
 You disperse negative energy in a 30-foot aura. This has the 
same effect as the two-action version, but it targets all living 
and undead creatures in the burst and reduces the amount of 
healing or damage to your spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (+1) the amount of healing or damage increases by 1d8, 
or by 2d8 if you're using the 1- or 2-action version to heal undead.
HARMONIZE POWER 
3 Casting  Verbal Casting; 
Trigger
 You flnish 
casting a composition. The triggering spell becomes a harmonized composition. 
A harmonized composition doesn't end if you cast another 
composition, and you can cast another composition on the same 
turn as a harmonized composition. Casting another harmonized 
composition ends any harmonized composition you have in effect.
HASTE SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minuteThe target acts faster. It gains the quick condition and can use the 
extra action each round only for Strike and Stride actions.
Heightened (7th) You can target up to 5 creatures.
HEAL SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting or more
Range touch, Range 30 feet, or Area
 30-foot aura (see text);
 Targets
 one willing living creature or one 
undead creature
You channel positive energy to heal the living or damage the 
undead. You restore Hit Points equal to 1d8 plus your spellcasting 
ability modifier to a willing living target, or deal that amount of 
positive damage to an undead target. The number of actions you 
spend when Casting this Spell determines its targets, range, area, 
and other parameters.
Ł  Somatic Casting
 The spell has a range of touch. You must 
succeed at a melee touch attack to damage an undead target.

Ł  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
 The spell has a range of 
30 feet and doesn't require a touch attack when targeting an 
undead creature. An undead target must attempt a Fortitude 
save, taking half damage on a success, no damage on a critical 
success, or double damage on a critical failure.
EnchantmentTransmutation
HealingNecromancy
Positive

Ł  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
 You disperse positive energy in a 30-foot aura. This has the 
same effect as the two-action version, but it targets all living 
and undead creatures in the burst and reduces the amount of 
healing or damage to your spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (+1) The amount of healing or damage increases by 1d8, 
or by 2d8 if you're using the 1- or 2-action version to heal the living.
HEAL ANIMAL
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting or more
Range touch or Range 30 feet (see text);
 Targets
 one willing living animal creature
You channel positive energy to heal the target, restoring Hit Points 
equal to 1d8 plus your spellcasting action modifier to the target. The 
number of actions spent Casting this Spell determines its range.
Ł  Somatic Casting
 The spell has a range of touch. 
Ł  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting 
The spell has a range of 30 feet. Heightened (+1) The amount of healing increases by 2d8.
HEALER'S BLESSING
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting; 
Trigger
 You cast a 
heal spell to heal a living creature. 
The amount healed by the triggering spell increases by 2 points per 
die. If you're both healing living creatures and damaging undead, 
the healing increases by that amount but the damage does not.
HEALING FONT
 POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting; 
Trigger
 You use 
channel energy to cast a heal spell. You draw power from your pool of Spell Points to cast 
heal, and thus this casting of heal doesn't expend a use of channel energy. 
HEROISM SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one humanoid creature
Duration
 10 minutesYou tap the target's inner heroism, granting it a +1 conditional bonus 
to attack rolls, Perception checks, saving throws, and skill checks.
Heightened (5th) The conditional bonus increases to +2.
Heightened (8th) The conditional bonus increases to +3.
HERO'S DEFIANCE
 POWER 
10
Casting  Verbal Casting; 
Trigger
 An attack 
would bring you to 0 Hit Points, and the attack 
isn't 
disintegrate 
and doesn't have the death trait.
You shout in deflance of your fate. Just before applying the 
attack's damage, you recover Hit Points equal to 19d4 plus your 
spellcasting ability modifier. If this is enough to prevent the attack 
from bringing you to 0 Hit Points, you don't become unconscious or 
dying. Either way, you can't use 
hero's defiance 
again for 1 minute. HIDEOUS LAUGHTER
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one living creature
Duration
 concentration
HealingNecromancy
Positive
Necromancy
Necromancy
EnchantmentMentalHealingNecromancy
Positive
EmotionEnchantmentMental230
The target is overtaken with uncontrollable laughter, based on 
the outcome of its Will saving throw.
Success The target is plagued with fits of laugher. It can't 
take reactions.
Critical Success Unaffected. Failure
 The target is overcome with fits of laughter. It is 
slowed 1 and can't take reactions.
Critical Failure
 The target falls prone and can't take any actions 
or reactions for 1 round, then suffiers the failure effects.
HORRID WILTING
 SPELL 
8 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 500 feet; Targets
 any number of living creatures
You pull the moisture from the targets' bodies, dealing 9d10 negative 
damage. Each target must attempt a Fortitude save to avoid 
withering in this fashion. Creatures made of water (such as water 
elementals) and plant creatures automatically treat their outcomes 
as one degree of success worse. Creatures whose bodies contain 
no signiflcant moisture (such as earth elementals) are immune to 
horrid wilting. Success Half damage. Critical Success No damage. Failure
 Full damage. Critical Failure
 Double damage. Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d10.
HOUSE OF IMAGINARY WALLS
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting
Range touchDuration
 1 round
You mime creating an invisible 10-foot-by-10-foot 
stretch of wall adjacent to you and within your reach. The wall 
is solid to those creatures who don't disbelieve it, and you and 
your allies can choose to believe the wall exists in order to keep 
it solid, for instance in order to climb onto it. Even incorporeal 
creatures who fail to disbelieve the wall can't pass through it. 
A creature who disbelieves is bolstered against your 
house of imaginary walls
. The wall doesn't block objects or creatures who 
didn't see your visual performance. The wall has AC 10, TAC 6, 
and Hardness equal to twice the spell's level.
HUMANOID FORM
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 10 minutes or until dismissedYou transform your appearance to look like a Small or Medium 
humanoid, such as a drow, dwarf, elf, goblin, halfling, human, orc, 
or lizardfolk. You count as a humanoid in addition to your normal 
traits while in this form, as well as gaining any trait related to the 
creature's kind (such as goblin or human). If this transformation 
reduces your size, it reduces your reach accordingly (using the 
effects of the shrink spell). This transformation doesn't change 
your statistics in any way. You can still wear and use your gear, 
and it changes size to match your new form if necessary. The 
item's size change ends immediately if the item leaves your person.
You don't gain the special abilities of the humanoid form you 
assume. This spell grants you a +4 conditional bonus to Deception 
Necromancy
Negative
CantripCompositionIllusionVisual 
Polymorph
Transmutation
checks to pass as a generic member of the chosen ancestry, but 
you can't make yourself to look like a speciflc person. If you want 
to Impersonate an individual, you still need to create a disguise, 
though the GM won't factor in the diffierence in ancestry when 
choosing the DC of your Deception check.
Heightened (3rd)
 You gain darkvision or low-light vision if the 
form you assume has that ability.
Heightened (5th)
 You can take on the appearance of a Large 
humanoid. If this increases your size, you gain the effects of the 
enlarge
 spell. HURTLING STONE
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting
You evoke a magical stone and throw it. Make 
a ranged Strike with the rock weapon against 
a single creature within 60 feet. The stone deals bludgeoning 
damage equal to 1d10 plus your Strength modifier. 
Heightened (+2) The stone's base damage increases by 1d10.
HYPERCOGNITION SPELL 
3 Casting  Verbal Casting
You rapidly catalog and collate information relevant to your 
current situation. You can instantly use up to 10 Recall 
Knowledge actions as part of Casting this Spell. If you have any 
special abilities or free actions that would trigger when you 
Recall Knowledge, you can't use them for these actions.
HYPNOTIC PATTERN
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting
Range 120 feet; Area
 10-foot burstDuration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
You create a pattern of shifting colors that hovers in the air. 
Creatures are dazzled while inside the pattern. A creature must 
attempt a Will saving throw if it is inside the pattern when you cast 
it, when it enters the pattern, ends its turn within the pattern, or 
uses a Seek or Interact action on the pattern. A creature currently 
fascinated by the pattern doesn't need to attempt new saves.
Success Unaffected. Failure
 The target is fascinated by the pattern.
Critical Failure
 The target is fascinated by the pattern. While 
it remains fascinated, it can't take reactions.
ILLUSORY CREATURE
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 500 feetDuration
 concentration
You create an illusory image of a Huge or smaller creature. It 
makes appropriate sounds, generates normal smells, and feels 
right to the touch. If you and the image are ever farther than 500 
feet apart, the spell ends. The image can't speak, but you can use your actions to speak 
through the creature, with the spell disguising your voice as 
appropriate. You might need to attempt a Deception or Performance 
check to convincingly mimic the creature, as determined by the 
GM. This is especially likely if you're trying to imitate a speciflc 
person and engage with someone that person knows.
Attack
EarthEvocation
Divination
IllusionVisualAuditory
IllusionVisual231 In combat, the illusion counts as a creature for fianking. It uses 
your spell roll for attack rolls and saving throws and your spell 
DC for its AC. If the image is hit by an attack or fails a save, the 
spell is dismissed. The creature has two actions per turn, which it 
takes when you Concentrate on the Spell.
The illusion can't directly affect the physical world, though 
its attacks can cause damage by making the target believe 
they're real. If the illusory creature hits with a Strike, the 
target takes mental damage equal to 1d4 plus your spellcasting 
ability modifier. This is a mental effect. The illusion's Strikes are 
nonlethal. If the damage doesn't correspond to the image of the 
monster—for example, if a Large dragon dealt only 5 damage—
the GM might allow the target to attempt a Perception check 
to disbelieve the spell as a free action. Any relevant resistances 
and weaknesses apply if the target thinks they do, as judged 
by the GM. For example, if the illusion wields a warhammer and 
attacks a creature resistant to bludgeoning damage, the creature 
would take less mental damage. However, illusory damage does 
not suppress regeneration or trigger other effects that require a 
certain damage type. Any creature that touches the image or uses the Seek 
action to examine it can attempt to disbelieve your illusion. 
When a creature disbelieves the illusion, it recovers from half 
the damage it had taken from it (if any) and doesn't take any 
further damage from it. The GM should track illusory damage 
dealt by the illusion.
Heightened (+1) The damage of the image's Strikes increases by 
1d4 and the maximum size of creature you can create increases 
by one (to a maximum of Gargantuan).
ILLUSORY DISGUISE
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 hour or until dismissedYour illusion can make you appear as another creature of the 
same body shape and roughly similar height (within 6 inches) and 
weight (within 50 pounds). The disguise is typically good enough 
to hide your identity, but not to impersonate a speciflc individual. 
The spell doesn't change your voice, scent, or mannerisms. You 
can also make clothing and items you wear appear diffierent, such 
as making your armor look like an ordinary dress. Held items are 
unaffected, and any worn item you remove returns to its true 
appearance until you don it again.
Casting illusory disguise counts as setting up a disguise for the Impersonate use of Deception; it ignores any circumstance 
penalties you might take for disguising yourself as a dissimilar 
creature, and it gives you a +4 conditional bonus to your 
Deception checks to avoid others seeing through your disguise. 
You can dismiss this disguise with a Verbal Casting action.
Heightened (2nd)
 The spell also disguises your voice and scent, 
and it gains the auditory trait. Heightened (3rd)
 You can appear as any creature of the same 
size, even a speciflc individual. You must have seen an individual 
to take on their appearance. The spell also disguises your voice 
and scent, and it gains the auditory trait. ILLUSORY OBJECT
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 500 feet; Area
 20-foot burstDuration
 10 minutesIllusionVisualIllusionVisual232 You create an illusory visual image of a stationary object. The 
entire image must fit within the spell's area. The object appears 
to animate naturally, but it doesn't make sounds or generate 
smells. For example, water would appear to pour down an 
illusory waterfall, but it would be silent.
Any creature that touches the image or uses the Seek action 
to examine it can attempt to disbelieve your illusion.
Heightened (2nd) Your image makes appropriate sounds, 
generates normal smells, and feels right to the touch. The spell 
gains the auditory trait. The duration increases to 1 hour.
Heightened (5th) As the 2nd-level version, but the duration 
is unlimited. ILLUSORY SCENE
 SPELL 
5 Casting 10 minutes (Verbal, Somatic)
Range 500 feet; Area
 30-foot burstDuration
 1 hourYou form an imaginary scene that includes up to 10 discrete 
creatures or objects of various sizes, all of which must be 
within the spell's area. These elements all generate appropriate 
sounds and smells, and they feel right to the touch. Elements 
of an illusory scene are incapable of speech. Unlike the 
illusory creature
 spell, creatures in your scene lack combat abilities and 
statistics. Your scene doesn't include changes to the environment 
around it, though you can place your scene within the illusory 
environment of a 
hallucinatory terrain
 spell. When you create the scene, you can choose to have it be 
static or follow a program. Though a static scene is stationary, 
it includes basic natural movement. Wind blowing on an illusory 
piece of paper would rustle it, for example. A program can be 
up to 1 minute long, and it repeats when flnished. For instance, 
you could create a programmed scene of two orcs fighting each 
other, and their fight would go the same way for each repetition. 
If you create a loop, the two fighters end up in the same place 
at the start of the fight and at the end of it, but you can smooth 
the program so it's hard to tell when the loop ends or begins. 
However, anyone observing long term almost always notices the 
program looping. You're unable to alter the program after you 
create the illusion.
Any creature that touches any part of the image or uses the 
Seek action to examine it can attempt to disbelieve your illusion. 
If they were interacting with a portion of the illusion, they 
disbelieve only that portion. They disbelieve the entire scene 
only on a critical success. Heightened (6th)
 Creatures or objects in your scene can speak. 
You must speak the speciflc lines for each actor when creating 
your program. The spell disguises your voice for each actor 
as appropriate.
Heightened (8th) Per 6th-level, and the duration is unlimited.
IMPLOSION
 SPELL 
9 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one corporeal creature
Duration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
You crush the target by causing it to collapse in on itself, dealing 
75 damage. The target must attempt a Fortitude save. Each time 
Auditory
IllusionVisualEvocation
you Concentrate on the Spell, you must choose a new target to 
be subject to the same effect. You can't affect more than one 
creature per turn with 
implosion. You can't target a creature 
that's incorporeal, gaseous, or liquid, or that otherwise lacks a 
solid form. Success Half damage. Critical Success No damage. Failure
 Full damage. Critical Failure
 Double damage. Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 10.
INSECT FORM
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedYou transform into a Medium animal battle form. You count as an 
animal in addition to your normal traits while in this form. Your 
gear is absorbed into your form; the constant abilities of your 
gear still function, but you can't activate any item abilities. When 
you transform, you gain the following:

Ł Low-light vision.

Ł Treat your Athletics bonus as +12, unless your own bonus is 
already higher.

Ł AC 23 (TAC 20), ignore armor's check penalty and reduced Speed.

Ł 10 temporary Hit Points that go away when you leave your 
battle form.

Ł Each form grants one or more natural melee attacks, as detailed 
in the insect types below, which are the only types of attacks 
you can use. You're trained with them. When attacking with 
them, your attack modifier is +10 and your damage bonus is 
+2. These are Strength-based attacks (for the purposes of the 
enfeebled condition, for example).
The special statistics of your battle form can be adjusted only 
by penalties, circumstance bonuses, and conditional bonuses. 
Your battle form prevents you from casting spells, speaking, or 
using most actions with the manipulate trait that require hands 
(the GM determines which actions of this sort you can take if 
there's doubt).You can dismiss this spell with a Concentrate on 
the Spell action. If you prepare this spell, choose from the following options. 
When in battle form, you gain the attacks, movement types, and 
special abilities listed. You can choose a more speciflc type of 
animal to turn into (such as a ladybug or scarab for beetle). This 
has no effect on your battle form's size or statistics.

Ł Ant mandibles, 
Damage 2d6 bludgeoning; 
Speed 30 feet, 
climb 30 feet.
Ł Beetle mandibles, Damage 2d10 bludgeoning; Speed 25 feet.
Ł Centipede darkvision; mandibles, Damage 1d8 piercing plus 
1d4 persistent poison; Speed 25 feet, climb 25 feet.
Ł Mantis scent; foreleg, 
Damage 2d8 bludgeoning; Speed 40 feet.
Ł Scorpion darkvision, tremorsense 60 feet; stinger, 
Damage 1d8 piercing plus 1d4 persistent poison; pincer (agile), 
Damage 1d6 bludgeoning; Speed 40 feet. 
Ł Spider darkvision; fangs, Damage 1d6 piercing plus 1d4 
persistent poison; web (touch attack, range increment 20 
feet), Damage entangles the target for 1 round; 
Speed 25 feet, climb 25 feet. Polymorph
Transmutation
233 Heightened (4th) Your battle form is Large and your attacks have 
10-foot reach. You must have enough space to expand into or the 
spell fails and is lost. Your transformed statistics are as follows: 
Athletics +14; AC 26 (TAC 22); 15 temporary HP; attack modifier 
+13; damage bonus +6.Heightened (5th) Your battle form is Huge and your attacks have 
15-foot reach. You must have enough space to expand into or the 
spell fails and is lost. Your transformed statistics are as follows: 
Athletics +18; AC 28 (TAC 24); 20 temporary HP; attack modifier 
+15; damage bonus +2 and double the number of weapon damage 
dice (including those of persistent damage).INSPIRE COMPETENCE
 CANTRIPCasting  Verbal Casting
Range 60 feet; Targets
 one allyDuration
 1 round
Your encouraging words inspire your ally to 
succeed at a task. You count as having taken 
suficient preparatory actions to Aid your ally on a skill check of 
your choice, regardless of the circumstances. When you take the 
Aid reaction to aid that ally on the chosen skill check, you can 
roll Performance instead of the normal check, and if you would 
fail or critically fail to Aid, you succeed instead. If you have 
legendary proficiency in Performance, you instead automatically 
critically succeed. The GM might rule that you can't use this ability if the act of 
encouraging your ally would interfere with the ally's skill check 
(like encouraging an ally to Sneak quietly, Lie to the king, or 
maintain a disguise). INSPIRE COURAGE
 CANTRIPCasting  Verbal Casting
Area
 60-foot auraDuration
 1 round
You inspire your allies with words or tunes of 
encouragement. You and all allies in the aura gain 
a +1 conditional bonus to attack rolls, damage rolls, and saves 
against fear.
INSPIRE HEROICS
 POWER 
4 Casting  Verbal Casting; 
Trigger
 You flnish 
casting inspire courage
.You call on your muse to greatly increase your 
inspire courage 
composition's benefits. Attempt a Performance check. The DC 
is usually a high-dificulty DC of a level equal to that of the 
highest-level target of your composition, but the GM can assign 
a diffierent DC based on the circumstances. The effect of your 
inspire courage 
depends on the result of your check.
Success The spell bonus from 
inspire courage
 increases
 to +2.Critical Success
 The spell bonus from your 
inspire courage 
increases
 to +3.Failure
 Your 
inspire courage 
retains its normal bonus of +1.
INVISIBILITY SPELL 
2 Casting Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
CantripCompositionEmotionEnchantmentMental 
CantripCompositionEmotionEnchantmentMental 
EnchantmentPower
IllusionVisualDuration
 1 minute or until dismissedThe target becomes invisible. This makes it unseen to all creatures, though they can attempt to find the target, making 
it sensed by them instead (see page 303). If the target acts in a 
hostile manner, the spell is dismissed after that hostile action, 
reaction, free action, or activity is completed.
Heightened (4th) The spell is not dismissed if the target acts in a hostile manner.
INVISIBILITY CLOAK
 POWER 
4 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting
Duration
 concentration or until dismissed, up to 1 minute
You become invisible, with the same restrictions as the 2nd-level 
invisibility spell. If you have a pool of Spell Points, you can continue concentrating 
on your 
invisibility cloak after the 1-minute limit by spending 1 
Spell Point to extend the limit by another minute.
Heightened (6th) The cloak provides the effects of a 4th-level 
invisibility spell. INVISIBILITY SPHERE
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting
Area
 10-foot aura; Targets
 you and any number of 
creatures in range
Duration
 10 minutes or until dismissedYou and all targets are invisible except to each other as long as 
you remain within the spell's area. If a creature made invisible 
by this spell leaves the spell's area, it becomes visible and 
remains so even if it returns to the spell's area. If any creature 
made invisible by this spell acts in a hostile manner, the spell 
is dismissed after that hostile action, reaction, free action, or 
activity is completed. While exploring, it's easy to move together and remain 
invisible. This is untenable in a battle, however. Once an 
encounter begins, creatures remain invisible until the end of the 
first round, at which point the spell ends.
Heightened (5th) The duration increases to 1 hour or until dismissed.
ITEM FACADE
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one object no more than 10 
feet by 10 feet by 10 feet
Duration
 1 hourYou make the target object look and feel as though it were in 
much better or worse shape. When you cast this spell, decide 
whether you want to make the object look decrepit or perfect. An 
item made to look decrepit appears broken and of poor quality. 
Metal looks rusted, wood looks dried out and cracked, and so on. 
An intact item made to look better appears as though its quality were one step better, brand new, and highly polished or well 
maintained. A broken item appears to be intact and functional. 
Destroyed items can't be affected by this spell.
A creature who Interacts with the item get a chance to 
disbelieve the illusion. 
Heightened (2nd) The duration is 24 hours.
Heightened (3rd)
 The duration is unlimited.
IllusionIllusionVisualIllusionVisual234 JUMP SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting
Your legs surge with strength, giving you the ability 
to leap high and far. You jump, either vertically or horizontally (or 
a mixture of the two) 30 feet without touching the ground. You 
must land on a space of solid ground within 30 feet of you, or 
else you fall after taking your next action.
Heightened (3rd)
 The range becomes touch, the target changes 
to one touched creature, and the duration becomes 1 minute. 
For the duration of the spell, the target can spend a move 
action to jump as described in the 1st-level version any number 
of times. KI BLAST
 POWER 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 30-foot coneYou unleash your ki as a powerful blast of force 
that deals 4d4 force damage. Each creature in the area must 
attempt a Fortitude saving throw.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure
 The creature takes full damage and is pushed 5 feet.
Critical Failure
 Double damage and pushed 10 feet. Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d4.
KI STRIKE 
 POWER 
1 Casting  Verbal Casting; 
Trigger
 You start to 
attempt an attack roll for an unarmed Strike.
You gain a +1 conditional bonus to the triggering attack roll.
KNOCK SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one door, lock, or container
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedYou make the target easier to open. 
Knock grants any who try to open the target a +4 conditional bonus to any Thievery or 
Athletics checks to do so. You can attempt a Thievery check to 
open the target as part of casting knock. As soon as the target is opened or unlocked, the spell is dismissed. Knock dispels lock. KNOW DIRECTION 
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
In your mind's eye, you see a path northward. You 
immediately know which direction is north (if there 
is such a thing as north at your current location).
Heightened (7th) You can choose to instead know the direction 
to a speciflc location with which you are very familiar, such as a 
previous home, a favorite tavern, or the temple where you trained.
KNOW THE ENEMY
 POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting; 
Trigger
 You hit a 
creature with a melee Strike.
Roll the appropriate skill check to identify the creature's abilities 
as if you had spent a Recall Knowledge action. You can use 
lorekeeper's fortune
 on this check. Move
Transmutation
Attack
Evocation
Force 
Transmutation
Transmutation
CantripDetectionDivination
Divination
Fortune 
LAY ON HANDS
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one willing living creature or 
one undead creature
Your hands become infused with positive energy as you lay them 
on the target, healing a living target or damaging an undead target. 
If you use 
lay on hands on a willing living target, you restore Hit 
Points equal to 1d4 plus your spellcasting ability modifier, and if 
the target is an ally, he gains a +1 conditional bonus to AC for 1 
round. Against an undead target, you deal the same amount of 
positive damage if you succeed at a melee touch attack, and the 
target takes a –1 conditional penalty to AC for 1 round.
Heightened (+1) The amount of healing (or damage to undead) increases by 2d4.
LENG'S STING
 SPELL 
7 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
You deal 7d4 piercing damage to the touched 
creature and aflict it with Leng spider venom, depending on its 
Fortitude save.
Success The target takes 4d6 poison damage. Critical Success The target is unaffected. Failure
 The target is aflicted with Leng spider venom at stage 1.
Critical Failure
 The target is aflicted with Leng spider venom 
at stage 2.
Leng Spider Venom
 (poison) Level
 13; Maximum Duration
 6 rounds; 
Stage 1 drained 1 (1 round); 
Stage 2 drained 1 and confused for 1 round (1 round).
LEVITATE
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one unattended object or willing creature
Duration
 1 minuteYou levitate the target 5 feet offi the ground. For the duration, 
you can spend a Somatic Casting action to move the target up 
or down 10 feet. A creature fioating in the air from levitate takes 
a –2 circumstance penalty to attack rolls. A fioating creature 
can spend an Interact action to stabilize itself and negate these 
penalties for the remainder of its turn. If the target is adjacent to 
a flxed object or terrain of suitable stability, it can move across 
the surface by climbing if the surface is vertical (like a wall) or 
crawling if the surface is horizontal (such as a ceiling). The GM 
determines which surfaces can be climbed or crawled across.
LIFE SIPHON 
 POWER 
4 Casting  Verbal reaction; 
Trigger
 You cast a 
wizard spell of the necromancy school that you 
expend one of your wizard spell slots to cast.
You use some of the spell's magic to heal yourself, regaining 1d8 
Hit Points per level of the spell.
LIGHT CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one unattended, nonmagical 
object of 1 Bulk or lessHealingNecromancy
Positive
Attack
Necromancy
Poison
Evocation
HealingNecromancy 
CantripEvocation
Light235 Duration
 1 day or until dismissed
The object begins to glow with pure light, casting bright light in a 
20-foot radius like a torch. If you cast this spell again on another 
object, the light on the last object you cast it on is dismissed.
Heightened (4th) The object instead sheds bright light in a 60-
foot radius. LIGHTNING BOLT
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 60-foot lineAll creatures in the area must attempt a Reflex save to avoid 
taking 4d12 electricity damage. Success Half damage. Critical Success No damage. Failure
 Full damage. Critical Failure
 Double damage. Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d12.
LINGERING COMPOSITION
 POWER 
1 Casting  Verbal Casting; 
Trigger
 You flnish casting 
a cantrip composition with a duration of 1 round.
You attempt to add a fiourish to your composition to extend 
its benefits. Attempt a Performance check. The DC is usually a 
high-dificulty DC of a level equal to the highest-level target of 
your composition, but the GM can assign a diffierent DC based on 
the circumstances. The effect depends on the result of your check.
Success The composition lasts 2 rounds.
Critical Success The composition lasts 3 rounds.
Failure
 The composition lasts 1 round.
LITANY AGAINST SLOTH
 POWER 
5 Casting  Verbal Casting 
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one evil creature
Duration
 1 round
Your litany rails against the sin of sloth, slowing your target's 
reactions depending on its Will save. A particularly slothful 
creature, such as a dretch, treats the outcome of the saving 
throw as one degree of success worse. The target is bolstered 
against your litanies.
Success The target takes a  –1 conditional penalty to all 
attack rolls attempted as part of reactions (such as 
Attacks of Opportunity).
Critical Success The target is unaffected. Failure
 The target can't spend reactions.
Critical Failure
 The target can't spend reactions and is slowed 1.
LITANY AGAINST WRATH
 POWER 
3 Casting  Verbal Casting 
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one evil creature
Duration
 1 round
Your litany rails against the sin of wrath, punishing the target 
for attacking good creatures depending on its Reflex save. 
A particularly wrathful creature, such as a vrock, treats the 
outcome of the saving throw as one degree of success worse. 
The target is bolstered against your litanies.
Success The first time the target spends an action or performs ElectricityEvocation
EnchantmentPower 
Evocation
LitanyGoodEvocation
LitanyGoodan activity that damages at least one good creature, it takes 
3d6 good damage. Critical Success The target is unaffected. Failure
 Each time the target spends an action or performs an 
activity that damages at least one good creature, it takes 
3d6 good damage. Critical Failure
 The target is weakened 1. Each time the target 
spends an action or performs an activity that damages at 
least one good creature, it takes 3d6 good damage. 
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d6.
LITANY OF RIGHTEOUSNESS
 POWER 
7 Casting  Verbal Casting 
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one evil creature
Duration
 1 round
You denounce an evildoer, rendering it susceptible to the power 
of good. The target gains weakness 5 to good. The target is 
bolstered against your litanies.
Heightened (+1) The weakness increases by 1.
LOCALIZED QUAKE
 POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 15-foot auraYou shake the earth, and each enemy in the area standing on 
solid ground must succeed at a Reflex save or fall prone.
LOCATE
 SPELL 
3 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range 500 feet; Targets
 one speciflc object or type 
of objectDuration
 concentration
You learn the direction to the target (if you picked a speciflc object, 
such as "my grandmother's sword") or the nearest target (if you 
picked a type of objects, such as "swords"). If the target is a speciflc 
object, you must have observed it directly with your own senses. 
If it's general, you still need to have an accurate mental image of 
the type of object. If there's lead or running water between you 
and the target, you can't locate the object. If you picked a type of 
object, this means you might find that is an object farther away if 
a nearer one is behind lead or running water.
Heightened (5th) You can target a speciflc creature or ancestry 
instead of an object. You must have met the creature or a creature 
of that ancestry up close in order to do so.
LOCK 
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one door, lock, or container
Duration
 1 day or until dismissed
The target's latch mechanism clinks shut, held fast by unseen 
magical restraints. You magically lock the target, either setting 
the Thievery DC equal to your spell DC or using the base lock 
DC with a +4 conditional bonus, whichever is higher. Any key or 
combination that once opened a lock affected by this spell does 
not do so for the duration of the spell.
If the lock is opened, the spell is dismissed. Assuming the target 
is not barred in some other way, you can unlock and open it by 
Evocation
LitanyGood 
EarthTransmutation 
DetectionDivination 
Abjuration
236spending a Somatic Casting action during which you touch the 
target. Doing so does not dismiss the spell. You can dismiss the spell 
at any time and from any distance with a Verbal Casting action.
Heightened (2nd) The duration increases to unlimited, but you 
must add a Material Casting action and expend 6 gp worth of 
gold dust as an additional cost. LONGSTRIDER
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 hourYour Speed is accelerated 10 feet.
Heightened (2nd) The duration increases to 8 hours.
LOREKEEPER'S FORTUNE
 POWER 
1 Casting  Verbal Casting; 
Trigger
 You spend a 
Seek or Recall Knowledge action.
Roll the Perception or Religion check you attempt as part of 
that action twice and take the higher result. If you're trained in 
Arcana, Nature, or Occult, you can also use this spell on those 
checks attempted as part of a Recall Knowledge action.
LOREMASTER'S RECALL
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic casting; 
Trigger
 You spend the 
Recall Knowledge action.
Roll the skill check you attempt as part of the triggering action 
twice and take the higher result.
LUCKY BREAK
 POWER 
2 Casting  Verbal reaction; 
Trigger
 You fail (but 
don't critically fail) an attack roll, saving throw, skill 
check, or Perception check.
Reroll the check and use the better of the two results.
MAGE ARMOR
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 day
You ward yourself with shimmering magical energy, gaining a 
+1 item bonus to AC. While wearing 
mage armor, you use your 
unarmored proficiency to calculate your AC.
Heightened (2nd)
 The bonus increases to +2, and you gain a +1 
item bonus to saving throws.
Heightened (4th) The bonus increases to +3, and you gain a +2 
item bonus to saving throws.
Heightened (6th) The bonus increases to +4, and you gain a +3 
item bonus to saving throws.
Heightened (8th) The bonus increases to +5, and you gain a +4 
item bonus to saving throws.
Heightened (10th) The bonus increases to +6, and you gain a +5 
item bonus to saving throws.
MAGE HAND 
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one unattended object of 
light Bulk or lessDuration
 concentration
You create a single arcane hand, either invisible or ghostlike, that 
Transmutation
Divination
Fortune
Divination
Fortune 
Divination
Fortune 
Abjuration
CantripEvocation
grasps the target object and moves it slowly up to 20 feet. Because 
you're levitating the object, you can move it in any direction. When 
you Concentrate on the Spell, you can move the object an additional 
20 feet. When the spell ends, the object falls if it's in the air.
Heightened (3rd)
 You can target an unattended object with a 
Bulk of 1 or less. Heightened (7th) The range increases to 60 feet, and you can 
target an unattended object with a Bulk of 1 or less.
MAGIC AURA
 SPELL 
1 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 one 3 Bulk or lighter objectDuration
 1 day
You can choose to have the target register as a common magic 
item of your level in your spellcasting class or lower, or to have it 
register as being under the effects of a spell of your choice that 
you can cast. If the target is magical, you can instead choose to 
have it not register as magical at all.
A caster using detect magic or study aura
 of an equal or higher spell level can attempt to disbelieve the illusion of a 
magic aura
. Magic aura
 doesn't mask auras of spells that are 9th level or 
higher or of items that are 19th level or higher.
Heightened (3rd)
 You can target a creature instead of an object. 
When you do, you can either conceal the auras of all magic items 
it has or have that creature register as being under the effect of 
a spell you know.
MAGIC FANG 
 SPELL 
1 Casting Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one willing allyDuration
 1 minuteChoose one of the target's unarmed attacks that deals 1 die of 
damage. You cause that unarmed attack to shine with primal energy. 
The unarmed attack counts a 
+1 magic weapon, gaining a +1 item 
bonus to attack rolls and dealing another die of damage on a hit.
MAGIC MISSILE
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Verbal Casting or more
Range 120 feet; Targets
 one creature
You send a dart of force streaking toward a creature that you can 
see. It automatically hits and deals 1d4+1 force damage. When 
Casting this Spell, you can increase the casting by a Material 
Casting action, a Somatic Casting action, or both. For each 
component you add, increase the number of missiles you shoot 
by one. You choose the target for each missile individually.
Heightened (+2)
 You shoot one additional missile with each 
action you spend.
MAGIC MOUTH
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature or object
Duration
 unlimited or until dismissedYou specify a trigger stimulus (see page 197) and a message up to 
25 words long. When the trigger stimulus occurs within 30 feet 
of the target, an illusory mouth appears on the target and speaks 
the message. Magic mouth is then dismissed. IllusionTransmutation
Evocation
Force
Auditory
IllusionVisual237 MAGIC WEAPON
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one nonmagical weapon that is unattended 
or that is wielded by you or a willing ally
Duration
 1 minuteThe weapon glimmers with magic and energy. The target 
becomes a 
+1 magic weapon, gaining a +1 item bonus to attack 
rolls and dealing another die of damage on a hit.
MAGNIFICENT MANSION
 SPELL 
7 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range 30 feetDuration
 24 hours
You conjure an extradimensional demiplane consisting of a 
spacious dwelling with a single entrance. The entrance connects 
back to the plane where you cast the spell, appearing where you 
choose within the spell's range. It appears as a faint, shimmering, 
vertical rectangle 5 feet wide and 10 feet high. You designate who 
can enter when you cast the spell. Once you enter the portal, you 
can shut the entrance, making it invisible. You and creatures you 
designated can reopen the door at will with the Interact action, just 
like opening a physical door. Other creatures must use extraplanar 
travel, such as 
plane shift, in order to enter the mansion.
Inside, the demiplane appears to be a mansion with a magniflcent foyer and numerous opulent chambers. The mansion 
can have any fioor plan you imagine as you cast the spell, 
provided it fits within a space 40 feet wide, 40 feet deep, and 30 
feet tall. While the entrance is closed, effects from outside the 
mansion fail to penetrate it, and vice versa. You can use scrying 
magic and similar effects to observe the outside only if they're 
capable of crossing planes.
A staffi of up to 24 servants attends to anyone within the 
mansion. These are like the servant created by the 
unseen servant
 spell, though they're visible, with an appearance you 
determine during casting. The mansion is stocked with enough food to serve a nine-course banquet to 150 people.
MARINER'S CURSE
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
You aflict the target with the curse of the roiling 
sea, depending on its Will save.
Success The target becomes sick 1. Reducing its sick condition 
to 0 ends the curse. Critical Success The target is unaffected. Failure
 The target becomes sick 1 and can't reduce its sick 
condition below 1 while the curse remains. Whenever it is sick 
and on the water at least a mile from shore, it is also slowed 1.
Critical Failure
 Per failure, but the target becomes sick 2.
MASK OF TERROR
 SPELL 
7 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minuteThe target appears to be a gruesome and terrifying 
creature to anyone observing it. The effect is 
Transmutation
Conjuration
ExtradimensionalAttack
CurseNecromancy
EmotionFear
IllusionMentalVisualunique to each observer, so a human viewing the target might 
see a demon with bloody fangs and a demon observing the target might see a glowing angelic visage.
When any creature attempts a hostile action or reaction against 
the target, the creature must attempt a Will save. Once it does, it 
doesn't need to attempt another save against 
mask of terror
 for 
any actions or reactions it spends until the end of its next turn.
Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure
 The creature becomes frightened 2 before taking its 
action or reaction.
Critical Failure
 The creature becomes frightened 2 and its 
action or reaction fails and is wasted.
Heightened (8th) You can target up to 5 creatures. If a creature 
spends an action or reaction that affects multiple targets 
simultaneously, it needs to attempt only one save against 
mask of terror
.MASTER'S ILLUSION 
 POWER 
2 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
 Range 30 feet; Targets
 up to six willing creatures
Duration
 10 minutesThe targets gain the effects of a 1st-level 
illusory disguise for the listed duration.
MAZE SPELL 
8 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 concentration, up to 10 minutes or 
until dismissedWhen you cast 
maze, you transport the target into an 
extradimensional maze of eldritch origin. Once each turn, the 
target can spend 1 action to attempt a Survival check against 
your spell DC to escape the maze.
The possible outcomes of the Survival check are as follows.
Success The creature is on the right path to the exit. If the 
target was already on the right path, it escapes the maze 
and the spell ends. Critical Success The creature escapes and the spell ends.
Failure
 The creature makes no progress toward escape.
Critical Failure
 The creature makes no progress toward 
escape, and if it was on the right path it no longer is.
Teleportation magic doesn't help the creature escape unless 
the magic can transport across planes, such as 
plane shift
. When the spell ends, either because the target escaped or the duration 
ran out, the target returns in the space it occupied when it was 
banished, or the nearest space if the original space is now fllled. 
It loses any remaining actions it would have on its current turn, 
but it can spend reactions normally. 
MELD INTO STONE
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 10 minutes or until dismissedYou merge with an adjacent block of stone with enough volume 
to fit you and your worn and held possessions. You must touch 
this stone when you cast the spell. You can cast spells while in the 
stone as long as they don't require line of effect beyond the stone,
IllusionConjuration
ExtradimensionalTeleportation
EarthTransmutation
238and you can hear, but not see, what's going on outside the stone.
Significant physical damage to the stone while you are inside 
expels you and deals 10d6 damage to you. 
Passwall
 expels you 
without dealing damage and dismisses meld into stone. You can 
dismiss this spell with a Verbal Casting action.
MENDING SPELL 
1 Casting 1 hour (Somatic Casting, Verbal Casting)
Range touch; Targets
 nonmagical object of light Bulk or lessYou remove the broken condition from the target if it is broken, 
or repair 1 Dent it has taken if it is dented.
Heightened (2nd) You can target a nonmagical object of 1 Bulk 
or less. Heightened (3rd)
 You can target a nonmagical object of 2 Bulk or 
less, or a magical object of 1 Bulk or less. MESSAGE 
 CANTRIPCasting  Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 see below
You mouth words, but instead of coming out of 
your mouth, they're transferred to the ears of the 
target. Though others cannot hear your words, the target can as 
if she were standing next to you. She can give a brief response as 
a reaction, or as a free action on her next turn if she wishes, but 
she must be able to see you and be within range to do so. If she 
responds, per the original missive only you can hear her response.
Heightened (3rd)
 The spell's range increases to 500 feet.
METAMAGICIAN'S SHORTCUT
 POWER 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 hourWhen you cast this spell, choose a metamagic feat you have. 
The next time you trigger that feat, you don't need to add a 
Somatic Casting action to the spell you cast. 
Metamagician's 
shortcut ends when this happens. You can't have more than one 
metamagician's shortcut
 active at a time, and if you cast it again 
the previous one ends.
METEOR SWARM
 SPELL 
9 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 500 feet; Area
 four 40-foot burstsYou call down four blazing meteors that explode. Each meteor deals 
3d10 bludgeoning damage to any creatures in the 10-foot burst at 
the center of each area of Effect; the meteor then explodes, dealing 
14d6 fire damage to any creatures in each 40-foot burst. The 
meteors' central 10-foot bursts can't overlap, and a creature takes 
the same amount of fire damage no matter how many overlapping 
explosions it's caught in. Each creature in the area can attempt a 
Reflex saving throw, which applies to both types of damage.
Success Half damage. Critical Success No damage. Failure
 Full damage. Critical Failure
 Double damage. Heightened (+1) The fire damage increases by 1d6 and the 
bludgeoning damage by 1d10.
Transmutation
Auditory
CantripIllusionLingualMentalEnchantmentEvocation
Fire
MIND BLANK
 SPELL 
8 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 24 hours
The target is immune to detection, revelation, and scrying unless 
the Effect is of a higher level than the 
mind blank spell. The target also gains a +4 conditional bonus to saves against mental Effects.
MIND PROBE
 SPELL 
5 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal Casting)
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minuteYou access the target's memories and knowledge unless it fends 
you off with a Will save.
Success The target is unaflected. Failure
 Each round of the probe's duration, you ask a different 
question and attempt to uncover the answer. For each 
question, the target can attempt a Deception check against 
your spell DC; if the target succeeds, you don't learn the 
answer, and on a critical success, the target sends you a 
false answer that you believe is a truthful answer.
Critical Failure
 Per failure, but the target takes a –4 
circumstance penalty to Deception checks against 
questions you ask as part of the probe.
MIND READING
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minuteYou read the target's mind, depending on its Will save. Once you 
cast mind reading
 on a target, you can't target that creature again 
until the duration ends.
Success You find out whether the target's Intelligence is 
higher than, equal to, or lower than yours.
Critical Success The target perceives vague surface thoughts 
from you when you cast the spell.
Failure
 You perceive vague surface thoughts from the target 
when you cast the spell, and you find out whether its 
Intelligence is higher than, equal to, or lower than yours.
Critical Failure
 Per failure, and for the duration of the spell, you 
can Concentrate on the Spell to detect the target's surface 
thoughts again. The target doesn't get any additional saves.
MINDLINK SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one willing creature
You link your mind to the target's mind and mentally impart to 
that target an amount of information in an instant that could 
otherwise be communicated in 10 minutes.
MIRACLE
 SPELL 
10
Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
You form a direct connection with your divine source and request 
intercession. Your divine source always refuses a request out of 
line with its nature and might choose to grant a different request 
Abjuration
Divination
LingualMental 
DetectionDivination
MentalDivination
MentalDivination
239(potentially more powerful or better fitting its nature) than the 
one you asked for. A miracle can do any of the following things.

Ł Duplicate any divine spell of 9th level or lower.

Ł Duplicate any non-divine spell of 7th level or lower.

Ł Produce any Effect whose power level is in line with the 
above Effects.
The GM might allow you to try using 
miracle
 to produce 
greater Effects than these, but doing so may be dangerous, or 
the spell may have only a partial Effect.
MIRROR IMAGE
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedThree illusory images swirl about your space, potentially causing 
those who attack you to hit one of the images instead of you. Any 
attack that would hit you has a random chance of hitting one of 
your images instead. If you have all three images up, there is a 1 in 
4 chance of hitting you (1 on a 1d4). With two images up, there is a 
1 in 3 chance of hitting you (1–2 on a 1d6). With only one image the 
chances are 1 in 2 (1–3 on a 1d6). If an image is hit, it is destroyed.
If the attack roll is a critical success and would hit one of the 
images, it becomes a success against you and one of the images 
is also destroyed. Once all the images are destroyed, the spell 
is dismissed. MISDIRECTION
 SPELL 
2 Casting 1 minute (Somatic, Verbal)
Range 30 feet; Targets
 two creatures or objects
Duration
 1 day or until dismissed
You designate one target as the primary target and the other 
as the secondary target. All Effects that would detect auras on 
the primary target instead detect the same types of auras from 
the secondary target. A creature reading the aura can attempt 
to disbelieve the illusion. You can dismiss the spell with a Verbal 
Casting action from up to a mile away.
MISLEAD SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
You turn yourself invisible and create an illusory duplicate of 
yourself. When you Concentrate on the Spell, you can mentally 
dictate a course of action for your duplicate to follow that round. 
Your duplicate acts as though it had your full number of actions, 
though it can't actually aflect anything in the environment. 
Both the invisibility and the duplicate remain as long as you 
concentrate. Per a 4th-level 
invisibility spell, committing a hostile action doesn't end 
mislead's
 invisibility. A creature that 
determines the duplicate is an illusion doesn't necessarily know 
you're invisible, and one that can see your invisible form doesn't 
necessarily know your duplicate is an illusion.
If you Cast a Spell, attack, or otherwise interact with another 
creature, you can attempt a Deception check as part of that 
action against observers' Perception DCs to convince them 
your duplicate took that action. This doesn't fool anyone who's 
aware your duplicate is an illusion, nor does it work if the attack 
obviously couldn't have come from the duplicate. For instance, 
IllusionVisualIllusionIllusionif you fired a ray you could make it look like it came from the 
duplicate, if the duplicate is positioned appropriately, but if you 
attack with a stafl and your duplicate is across the room from the 
target, your attempt at deception would fail.
MODIFY MEMORY
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 permanentYou alter the target's memories, either erasing a memory, 
enhancing a memory's clarity, altering a memory, or adding a false 
memory. The target can attempt a Will save to resist the spell. 
Success The target is unaflected but thinks your spell was 
something harmless instead of modify memory, unless 
it identifies the spell (usually by spending the Identify 
Magic action).Critical Success The target is unaflected and realizes you tried 
to alter its memory.
Failure
 During the first 5 minutes of the spell's duration, you 
can Concentrate on the Spell to modify a memory once 
each round. When you do, you imagine up to 6 seconds of 
memory to modify, to a maximum of 5 continuous minutes 
of memory.
Any memories you've altered remain changed as long as the spell 
is active. If the target moves out of range before the 5 minutes is 
up, you can't alter any further memories.
Heightened (6th) You can cast the spell on a willing target in 
order to suppress all memory of a particular topic, detailed in 50 
words or fewer. The spell patches these omissions with indistinct 
haze. Instead of having a duration, the Effects last indefinitely 
even in the absence of magic and can be removed only by 
powerful spells such as alter reality.
MOMENT OF RENEWAL
 SPELL 
8 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
The target experiences a day's worth of recovery in an instant. Any 
detrimental Effects that would be gone after 24 hours end, though 
this doesn't shorten the duration of any active spells aflecting the 
target. The target regains Hit Points and recovers from conditions 
as if it had taken 24 hours of rest. The creature doesn't regain 
spells for resting or get other benefits of rest other than healing. 
The target is then bolstered against all 
moment of renewal
 spells. MONEY TALKS
 POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic free action; 
Trigger
 You Cast a 
Spell that has a cost with a value measured in gp. 
You can substitute an equal value of gp for the spell's cost. 
MONSTROSITY FORM
 SPELL 
8 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedYou transform into the shape of a legendary monster, assuming 
a Huge battle form. You must have enough space to expand into 
or the spell is lost. You count as an animal in addition to your 
normal traits while in this form. Your gear is absorbed into your 
Divination
Mental 
HealingNecromancy
Transmutation
Polymorph
Transmutation
240form; your constant abilities of your gear still function, but you 
can't activate any item abilities. When you transform, you gain 
the following:

Ł AC 36 (TAC 33) and ignore your armor's check penalty and 
Speed reduction.

Ł One or more natural melee attacks, which are the only 
types of attacks you can use. You're trained with them. 
When attacking with them, your attack modifier is +26 and 
the damage bonus is listed with your attacks. These are 
Strength-based attacks (for the purposes of the enfeebled 
condition, for example).

Ł 20 temporary Hit Points that go away when you leave your 
battle form.

Ł Darkvision.
Ł Athletics +27 (unless your own total modifier is higher).
The special statistics of your battle form can be adjusted only 
by penalties, circumstance bonuses, and conditional bonuses. 
Your battle form prevents you from casting spells, speaking, or 
using most actions with the manipulate trait that require your 
hands (the GM determines which manipulate actions you can 
spend if there's doubt). You can dismiss this spell by using an 
action (this action has the concentrate trait).
When you prepare this spell, choose the creature you wish to 
turn into from the following options. When in battle form, you 
gain the attacks, movement types, and special abilities listed.

Ł Phoenix beak (reach 15 feet), 
Damage 2d6+12 piercing plus 
2d4 fire and 2d4 persistent fire; talon (agile, reach 15 feet), 
Damage 2d8+12 slashing; Speed 30 feet, fiy 90 feet; Shroud 
of Flame: You gain a divine fire aura that extends out 20 
feet from you. A creature that enters or ends its turn within 
the aura takes 2d6 fire damage. A creature can take this 
damage only once per turn. You can spend 1 action with the 
concentrate trait to activate or deactivate this aura.

Ł Purple Worm
 jaws (reach 10 feet),
 Damage 2d12+20 piercing; stinger (agile, reach 10 feet), 
Damage 2d8+15 piercing plus 2d6 persistent poison; body (reach 10 feet)
 Damage 2d8+20 bludgeoning; Speed 40 feet, burrow 30 
feet, swim 20 feet; Inexorable:
 You automatically recover 
from the paralyzed, slowed, and stunned conditions at the 
end of each of your turns. You're also immune to being 
hampered and immobilized and ignore difficult terrain and 
greater difficult terrain.

Ł Sea Serpent jaws (reach 15 feet), 
Damage 2d12+20 piercing; 
tail (reach 25 feet), 
Damage 2d8+20 bludgeoning; 
Speed 20 
feet, swim 90 feet; Spine Rake:
 You can spend a move action 
to extend your spines and swim or Stride. Each creature 
you're adjacent to at any point during your movement takes 
4d8+10 slashing damage (Reflex DC 30 for half damage, or 
no damage on a critical success).MOON FRENZY
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 up to 5 willing creatures
Duration
 1 minuteA feral aspect overcomes the targets, making them tough and 
savage. Targets gain 5 temporary Hit Points, are accelerated 10, and 
MorphTransmutation
gain weakness 5 to silver. They also grow vicious fangs and claws, 
both of which are unarmed attacks. The fangs deal 3d8 piercing 
damage; the claws deal 3d6 slashing damage and have the agile 
and finesse traits. The targets use their highest weapon or unarmed 
attack proficiency with these attacks. On a critical hit with one of 
these weapons, the target takes 1d4 persistent bleed damage.
The targets can't spend concentrate actions unless those 
actions have the rage trait. Their Seek actions gain the rage trait 
during the spell's duration. A creature can attempt to end the 
spell's Effect on themself by spending an action and attempting a 
Will save against your spell DC.
If a target is in the light of a full moon, they also grow by one 
size if they were Medium or smaller. This increases the reach of a 
Medium or Tiny creature by 5 feet.
Heightened (6th) The temporary Hit Points increase to 10, the silver 
weakness to 10, and the damage dealt by the attacks to four dice.
Heightened (8th) The temporary Hit Points increase to 15, the silver 
weakness to 15, and the damage dealt by the attacks to five dice.
MOONBEAM POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Targets
 one creature or object
You call forth a beam of glowing moonlight. Make 
a ranged touch attack against the target. On a hit, 
you deal 1d6 fire damage plus your spellcasting ability modifier 
and dazzle the target for 1 round. Double the damage on a critical 
hit. Damage from
 moonbeam counts as silver for the purposes of 
weaknesses, resistances, and the like. 
Heightened (+1) The ray's damage increases by 1d6.
MOONLIGHT GLOW
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 60-foot burst centered on you
Duration
 10 minutesYou cause the area to shimmer with moonlight. This counts as 
dim light, but any magical script or arcane symbols in the area 
glow a slightly brighter blue, granting a +1 circumstance bonus 
to Perception checks to Seek them. Magical ink visible only in 
moonlight also appears in an area of 
moonlight glow
.MYSTIC BEACON 
 POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one willing creature
The next damaging or healing spell the target casts before the 
start of your next turn deals or heals damage as if the spell were 
heightened 1 level higher than its actual level; the spell otherwise 
functions at its actual level. 
NATURE INCARNATE
 SPELL 
10
Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedYou transform into an incarnation of nature, assuming a battle 
form: Medium for a green man and Gargantuan (30-foot-by-30-foot 
space) for a kaiju. You must have enough space to expand into or 
the spell is lost. You count as a plant if you choose green man or as 
a beast if you choose kaiju in addition to your normal traits while 
Attack
Evocation
Fire
LightEvocation
Light 
Evocation
Polymorph
Transmutation 
241in this form. Your gear is absorbed into your form; your constant 
abilities of your gear still function, but you can't activate any item 
abilities. When you transform, you gain the following:

Ł AC 43 (TAC 39) and ignore your armor's check penalty and 
Speed reduction.

Ł One or more natural attacks, which are the only types 
of attacks you can use. You're trained with them. When 
attacking with them, your attack modifier is +31 and the 
damage bonus is listed with your attacks. Melee attacks 
you gain are Strength-based attacks (for the purposes of 
the enfeebled condition, for example), and ranged attacks 
you gain are Dexterity-based attacks. They all target the 
enemy's AC.

Ł 30 temporary Hit Points that go away when you leave your 
battle form.

Ł Darkvision.
Ł Athletics +32 (unless your own total modifier is higher).
The special statistics of your battle form can be adjusted only 
by penalties, circumstance bonuses, and conditional bonuses. 
Your battle form prevents you from casting spells or using most 
actions with the manipulate trait that require your hands (the GM 
determines which manipulate actions you can spend if there's 
doubt). You can dismiss this spell with a concentrate action.
When in battle form, you gain the attacks, movement types, 
and special abilities listed below for the form you chose.

Ł Green Man
 vines (versatile piercing, reach 30 feet), 
Damage 6d8+12 bludgeoning; thorns (range 100 feet), 
Damage 6d6+6 piercing; 
Speed 40 feet, climb 40 feet; Green 
Caress:
 Enemies other than plants within 60 feet must 
succeed at a Fortitude save against your spell DC or become 
sluggish 1 for 1 round (sluggish 2 on a critical failure).

Ł Kaiju jaws (reach 30 feet), 
Damage 6d10+10 piercing; 
claws (agile, reach 30 feet), 
Damage 6d8+8 slashing; foot 
(agile, reach 15 feet), 
Damage 6d6+10 bludgeoning; Speed 
50 feet; Resistance 5 to physical damage; 
Unstoppable: You are immune to being hampered and immobilized 
and ignore difficult terrain and greater difficult terrain; 
Trample
: As a 3-action activity, you can move up to double 
your Speed and move through the space of Huge or 
smaller creatures, trampling each creature whose space 
you enter. A trampled creature takes foot damage based 
on a Reflex save against your spell DC (half damage on a 
success, no damage on a critical success, double damage 
on a critical failure).
NATURE'S BOUNTY 
 POWER 
2 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Requirement
 You can cast this spell only in a 
natural area that supports significant plant life.
You call forth nature's bounty, providing enough clean water and 
fresh fruits and vegetables to sustain one human for a day. If you 
have a pool of Spell Points, you can spend more Spell Points to 
sustain an additional human for each additional Spell Point you 
spend. Most Medium creatures eat the same amount as a human 
each day. Most Small creatures eat 1/4 as much as a human (1/16 
as much for most Tiny creatures, and so on), and most Large 
creatures eat 10 times as much as a human (100 times as much 
for Huge creatures and so on).
Conjuration
Plant242 Heightened (+3) The initial casting and each additional Spell Point produce enough food for an additional human.
NATURE'S ENMITY
 SPELL 
9 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 100 feet; Targets
 up to five creatures
Duration
 10 minutesAnimals, plants and weather in the area turn against the targets. 
Each target suflers from the following Effects.

Ł Vegetation springs up from any surface, making targets 
entangled any time they're adjacent to a plant or a surface 
of stone or earth.
Ł Aggressive animals attack unpredictably then depart. At 
the start of its turn, each target rolls a DC 8 flat check. On 
a failure, it's attacked by swarming creatures that deal 2d10 
slashing damage. The target can attempt a Reflex save, taking 
half damage on a success, no damage on a critical success, or 
double damage on a critical failure. The target is flat-footed 
for 1 round on any result other than a critical success.

Ł The target also loses any connection to nature or natural 
creatures. Any animal or plant creature becomes hostile to 
it, even a companion creature like an animal companion. 
The target also has to succeed at a DC 5 flat check when 
casting any primal spell or the spell fails. The GM might determine that you can't subject some 
creatures to the ire of nature. For example, a primal spellcaster 
of your level or higher or an avatar of nature might be immune 
to these Effects. NEGATE AROMA
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one willing or unconscious creature
Duration
 1 hourThe target loses its scent, preventing creatures from noticing it 
using scent alone. A creature attempting a Perception check with 
scent and other senses might be able to notice the lack of natural 
scent. If the target has a stench attack, that ability is also negated.
Heightened (5th) The range increases to 30 feet, and you can 
target up to 10 creatures.
NEUTRALIZE POISON
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
You try to cure one poison aflicting the target. Treat this as 
counteracting the poison (see page 319).NIGHTMARE SPELL 
4 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range planetary; Targets
 one creature you know 
by name
Duration
 1 day or until dismissed
You send disturbing nightmares to your target. The next time the 
target falls asleep, it must attempt a Will saving throw against 
the nightmare. If you know the target only by name and have 
never met them, the target gets a +4 circumstance bonus to the 
Will saving throw.
EnchantmentAbjuration
HealingNecromancy
IllusionMentalSuccess The target suflers no adverse Effects from the 
nightmare, other than its memories.
Critical Success The target suflers no adverse Effects and is 
inoculated for 1 week.
Failure
 The target awakens fatigued.
Critical Failure
 The target awakens fatigued and is drained 2 
until no longer fatigued.
NONDETECTION
 SPELL 
3 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 one creature or object
Duration
 8 hoursYou make the target difficult to detect. 
Nondetection dispels or attempts to dispel all detection, revelation, and scrying 
divinations made against the target or the target's gear 
throughout the duration. Successfully dispelling a divination that 
targets an area or multiple targets negates the Effects only for 
nondetection's
 target. OBSCURING MIST
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Area
 20-foot burstDuration
 1 minute or until dismissedYou create a cloud of mist in the area that makes all creatures 
within it concealed. You can dismiss the cloud with a Verbal 
casting action. OUTCAST'S CURSE
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
You aflict the target with a curse that makes its 
presence ofl-putting and grating, depending on the 
outcome of its Will save.
Success Per failure, but the Effect ends on its own after 1 
minute instead. Critical Success The target is unaflected. Failure
 The target must roll twice and use the worse result 
whenever attempting a Deception, Diplomacy, Intimidation, 
or Performance check, and all creatures she encounters have 
an initial attitude toward her of one step worse (for instance, 
unfriendly instead of indifferent). The Effect is permanent. 
Critical Failure
 Per failure, but all creatures the target encounters 
have an initial attitude towards her of two steps worse.
OVERWHELMING PRESENCE
 SPELL 
9 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 40-foot burst; Targets
 any number of creatures
Duration
 until full tribute is paidYou surround yourself with a supernatural 
splendor, appearing to be a god or similarly majestic being. You 
choose the particular majestic aspects of your new appearance. 
This causes the targets to pay tribute to you by bowing or 
spending some other action in keeping with your appearance. 
The number of times they must do this depends on the outcome 
of their Will saves.
Abjuration
Conjuration
Water
Attack
CurseEnchantmentMentalMisfortuneAuditory
EnchantmentMentalVisual243 Success The target must pay tribute two times.
Critical Success The target is unaflected. Failure
 The target must pay tribute six times.
Critical Failure
 Per failure, and the target must spend all 
actions paying tribute if possible.
Paying tribute is a manipulate action or move action, as 
chosen by the creature paying tribute. A creature under this 
Effect must pay tribute to you at least once on each of its turns 
if possible. While under this spell, a creature is fascinated by 
you and can't act in a hostile fashion toward you. The target is 
bolstered against your 
overwhelming presence
.PALADIN'S SACRIFICE
 POWER 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting; 
Trigger
 The targeted 
creature is hit or critically hit by a Strike, or the target fails 
or critically fails a saving throw against an Effect that doesn't 
aflect you.
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one allyYou take all the Effects of the hit, critical hit, failed save, or 
critically failed save instead of the ally. These Effects ignore any 
resistances, immunities, or other abilities you have that might 
mitigate them in any way.
PARALYZE
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one humanoid creature
Duration
 varies
You attempt to paralyze the target, potentially freezing it in 
place, depending on the outcome of the target's Will save.
Success The target is slowed 1 for 1 round.
Critical Success The target is unaflected. Failure
 The target is paralyzed for 1 round.
Critical Failure
 The target is paralyzed for 4 rounds. At the 
start of each of its turns, it can attempt a new Will save to 
reduce the remaining duration by 1 round or end it entirely 
on a critical success. Heightened (4th)
 You can target a humanoid or non-humanoid 
creature.
Heightened (7th) You can target up to 10 humanoid creatures.
Heightened (9th) You can target up to 10 creatures, and they 
don't have to be humanoids.
PARANOIA
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minuteThe target is stricken by intense paranoia towards all creatures 
around it, with Effects determined by the outcome of its Will 
saving throw.
Success The target believes everyone it sees is a potential 
threat. It becomes unfriendly to all creatures that were 
previously allies, treating only itself as an ally. The spell 
ends after 1 round.
Critical Success The target is unaflected. Failure
 Per success, but the Effect lasts the full minute.
Critical Failure
 Per failure, except the target believes that 
Abjuration
EnchantmentMentalIllusionMentaleveryone it sees is a mortal enemy. It uses its reactions 
and free actions against these enemies regardless of 
whether they were previously its allies, as determined by 
the GM. It otherwise acts as rationally as normal and will 
likely prefer to attack enemies that are actively attacking 
or hindering it. Heightened (6th) You can target up to five creatures.
PASS WITHOUT TRACE
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 hourYou reduce the tracks you leave behind, adding a +4 conditional 
bonus to the DC needed to track you, or setting the DC of 
tracking you equal to the spell's DC, whichever is higher. You can 
gain only one of these two benefits; casting 
pass without trace
 multiple times doesn't improve the DC further.
Heightened (2nd) The duration increases to 8 hours.
Heightened (4th) The duration increases to 8 hours. The spell 
has a 20-foot range and a 20-foot aura area, aflecting up to 10 
creatures of your choice within that area.
PASSWALL
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Area
 5-foot-wide, 10-foot-tall, 10-foot-
deep section of wooden, plaster, or stone wall
Duration
 1 hourYou create a visible tunnel through the wall in the chosen area, 
replacing the area with empty space; if the wall is thicker than 
10 feet, the tunnel ends 10 feet in. Even a small layer of metal in 
the wall prevents this spell from functioning. This spell doesn't 
reduce the integrity of the structure, so the wall doesn't collapse 
even if it's load-bearing. When the spell ends, anyone inside the 
tunnel is shunted to the nearest exit.
Heightened (7th) The tunnel can be up to 20 feet deep. 
The areas of the wall that contain your tunnel's entrance 
(and exit, if applicable) appear completely normal (unless 
subjected to true seeing), despite the tunnel's existence. The 
tunnel's entrance normally counts as a solid wall, but you can 
specify a password or a trigger stimulus. Anyone speaking 
the password or fulfilling the trigger stimulus can enter the 
tunnel freely.
PERFECTED FORM
 POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting; 
Trigger
 You fail or 
critically fail a saving throw against a petrification 
or polymorph Effect. Reroll the saving throw and use whichever result was better.
PERFECTED MIND
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
You meditate upon perfection to remove all distractions from 
your mind. Attempt another Will save against one mental 
Effect currently aflecting you that required a Will save. If the 
new save would have a worse result than the original save, 
nothing happens. You can use 
perfected mind only once against 
a particular Effect. Abjuration
Conjuration
EarthAbjuration
Fortune
Abjuration
244 PEST FORM
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 10 minutes or until dismissedYou transform into a Tiny nonthreatening animal, such as a cat, 
rat, insect, or lizard. You count as an animal in addition to your 
normal traits while in this form. You can choose the specific type 
of animal you turn into (such as a rat or praying mantis). This 
has no Effect on your battle form's size or statistics. Your gear 
is absorbed into your form; the constant abilities of your gear 
still function, but you can't activate any item abilities. When you 
transform, you gain the following abilities:

Ł AC 13 (TAC 13) and ignore your armor's check penalty and 
Speed reduction.

Ł One or more natural melee attacks, which are the only 
types of attacks you can use. You're trained with them. 
When attacking with them, your attack modifier is +6 
and your attacks deal 1 piercing damage (or another type 
depending on your form, as the GM sees fit). These are 
Dexterity-based attacks (for the purposes of the sluggish 
condition, for example).

Ł Weakness 5 to all physical damage. (If you take physical 
damage while in this form, you take 5 additional damage.)

Ł Speed 10 feet.
Ł Low-light vision, scent.

Ł Acrobatics +10 and Stealth +10 (unless your own total 
modifiers are higher); Athletics –4.
The special statistics of your pest form can be adjusted only 
by penalties, circumstance bonuses, and conditional bonuses. 
Your pest form prevents you from casting spells, speaking, or 
spending most actions with the manipulate trait that require 
your hands (the GM determines which manipulate actions you 
can spend if there's doubt). You can dismiss this spell by using an 
action (this action has the concentrate trait).
Heightened (4th) You can turn into a fiying creature, such as a 
bird. You also gain a fiy Speed of 20 feet.
PHANTASMAL CALAMITY
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 500 feet; Area
 30-foot burstA vision of apocalyptic destruction fills the mind of each 
target. Each creature in the area sees its own version of 
the calamity tailored to its worst fears, and must attempt 
a Will saving throw. This vision deals 11d6 mental damage 
and inflicts other effects, depending on the outcome of each 
creature's saving throw.
Success Half damage. Critical Success Unaflected. Failure
 Full damage. Critical Failure
 Double damage and the creature falls prone. 
It must succeed at a Reflex saving throw or believe it's 
trapped (fallen into a crevasse, adrift at sea, or some other 
fate depending on its vision). If it fails, it's stunned for 1 
minute. It gets a new Will save at the end of each of its 
turns, and on a success, it disbelieves the illusion and 
recovers from stunned.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
Polymorph
Transmutation
IllusionMentalPHANTASMAL KILLER
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Targets
 one living creature
You create a phantasmal image of the most 
fearsome creature imaginable to the target. Only 
the spell's target can see the killer, though you can 
see the vague shape of the illusion as it races forth to attack. The 
Effect of the killer is based on the outcome of the target's Will 
saving throw.
Success The target is frightened 1.Critical Success The target is unaflected. Failure
 The target takes 8d6 mental damage and is frightened 2.Critical Failure
 The target is so afraid it might instantly die. It must attempt a Fortitude saving throw; if the target 
fails, it is reduced to 0 Hit Points and dies. On a successful 
Fortitude save, the target still takes 12d6 mental damage, 
is fieeing until the end of its next turn, and is frightened 4.
Heightened (+1) The damage on a failure increases by 2d6 and on 
a critical failure by 3d6.
PHANTOM PAIN
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minutePain wracks the target, dealing 1d4 mental damage and 1d4 
persistent mental damage. The target must attempt a Will 
saving throw.
Success Full damage, but no persistent damage and the spell ends immediately.
Critical Success The target is unaflected. Failure
 Full damage, and the target is sick 1. If the target recovers from being sick, its persistent mental damage 
ends as well and the spell ends.
Critical Failure
 Per failure, but the target is sick 2.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d4 and the persistent 
damage by 1.
PHANTOM STEED
 SPELL 
2 Casting 10 minutes (Somatic, Verbal)
Range 30 feetDuration
 8 hours or until dismissedYou conjure a Large, magical, horselike creature that only you 
(or another Medium or Small creature you choose when casting 
the spell) can ride. The horse is clearly phantasmal in nature, 
has 18 AC and 10 Hit Points, and automatically fails all saves. If 
reduced to 0 Hit Points, it disappears and the spell is dismissed. 
The steed has a Speed of 40 feet and can hold your body weight 
(or the body weight of the creature you chose) plus 20 Bulk.
Heightened (4th)
 The steed has a Speed of 60 feet, can walk on 
water, and ignores areas of natural difficult terrain.
Heightened (5th)
 The steed has a Speed of 60 feet, can walk on 
water, and ignores areas of natural difficult terrain. It can also 
walk on air (per 
air walk
) but must end its turn on solid ground 
or fall. Heightened (6th)
 The steed can walk or fiy at a Speed of 80 feet, 
can walk on water, and ignores areas of natural difficult terrain.
Death
EmotionFear
IllusionMentalIllusionMentalNonlethalConjuration
245 PHYSICAL BOOST
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one living creature
Duration
 until the end of the target's next turn or until dismissed
You temporarily improve the target's physique. The target gains a 
1d4 conditional bonus to the next Acrobatics, Athletics, or Stealth 
roll it attempts. Once it uses this bonus, the spell is dismissed.
PLANE SHIFT
 SPELL 
7 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 one willing creature, or up to 
eight willing creatures joining hands
The target or targets move to another dimensional plane, 
such as the Plane of Fire, the Shadow Plane, Hell, or the 
Abyss. Attempting to reach a particular plane requires specific 
knowledge of the plane and a magic tuning fork created from 
material from that plane; while the tuning forks for most 
prominent planes are uncommon, just like the spell 
plane 
shift, more obscure planes and demiplanes often have rare 
tuning forks. 
The spell is highly imprecise, and you appear 1d20×25 miles 
from the last place one of the targets (of your choice) was located 
the last time that target traveled to the plane. If it's the first time 
traveling to a particular plane for all targets, you appear at a 
random location on the plane, though you can use other means of 
transit, such as teleport, to travel while on the new plane. 
Plane shift doesn't provide a means of return travel, though casting 
plane shift again allows you to return to your previous plane 
unless there are extenuating circumstances.
PLANT FORM
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedYou transform into a Large plant battle form. 
You count as a plant in addition to your normal traits while 
in this form. Your gear is absorbed into your form; the 
constant abilities of your gear still function, but you can't 
activate any item abilities. When you transform, you gain the 
following
 abilities:
Ł AC (TAC 24) and ignore your armor's check penalty and 
Speed reduction.

Ł One or more natural melee attacks, which are the only types 
of attacks you can use. You're trained with them. When 
attacking with them, your attack modifier is +15 and your 
damage bonus is +11. These are Strength-based attacks (for 
the purposes of the enfeebled condition, for example).

Ł 12 temporary Hit Points that go away when you leave your 
battle form.

Ł Resistance 10 to poison.

Ł Low-light vision.

Ł Athletics +17 (unless your own total modifier is higher).
The special statistics of your battle form can be adjusted only 
by penalties, circumstance bonuses, and conditional bonuses. 
Your battle form prevents you from casting spells, speaking, or 
spending most action with the manipulate trait that require your 
hands (the GM determines which manipulate actions you can 
Transmutation
Conjuration
Teleportation
PlantPolymorph
Transmutation
spend if there's doubt). You can dismiss this spell by using an 
action (this action has the concentrate trait).
When you prepare this spell, choose the creature you wish to 
turn into from the following options. When in battle form, you 
gain the attacks, movement types, and special abilities listed. 
You can substitute a similar specific plant to turn into (such as 
a pitcher plant instead of a fiytrap). This has no Effect on your 
battle form's size or statistics.

Ł Flytrap jaws (reach 10 feet), 
Damage 2d8 piercing and you 
can spend an action immediately after a hit to grab the 
target; Speed 15 feet; resistance 10 to acid

Ł Shambling Mound
 vine (reach 15 feet), 
Damage 2d8 slashing; 
Speed 20 feet, swim 20 feet; resistance 10 to electricity

Ł Treant
 branch (reach 15 feet), 
Damage 2d10 bludgeoning; foot, Damage 2d8 bludgeoning; Speed 30 feet; you can 
speak in this form, but still can't supply Verbal components.
Heightened (6th)
 Your battle form is Huge and the reach of your 
attacks increases by 5 feet. You must have enough space to 
expand into or the spell is lost. Your transformed statistics are as 
follows: AC 31 (TAC 27); attack modifier +19; damage bonus +5; 
24 temporary HP; Athletics +19.
POLAR RAY
 SPELL 
8 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Targets
 one creature or object
You fire a blue-white ray of freezing air and swirling sleet from 
your finger that can chill its target to the bones. You must 
succeed at a ranged touch attack to aflect the target, which then 
takes 8d8 cold damage and is drained 2.Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d8.
POSSESSION SPELL 
7 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one living creature
Duration
 concentration up to 1 minute
You send your mind and soul into the target's body, attempting 
to take control, and the target must attempt a Will save. You 
can choose to take the Effects of a lower degree of success if 
you prefer. While you're possessing a target, your true body is 
unconscious and can't wake up normally.
Success You possess the target but can't control it, riding 
along in its body while the spell lasts. Critical Success The target is unaflected. Failure
 You possess the target and take partial control of it. Both 
you and the target can spend actions using the target's
 body.
Critical Failure
 You possess the target and take total control. 
Only you can spend actions using the target's body, and the 
target can only watch as you manipulate it like a puppet.
Heightened (9th)
 You can Concentrate on the Spell for up to 10 
minutes. If you wish, you can physically enter the creature's 
body, protecting your physical body while the spell lasts.
POWER WORD BLIND
 SPELL 
7 Casting  Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 varies
ColdEvocation
MentalNecromancy
Possession
Auditory
EnchantmentMental 
246 You utter a word of power that can make the target blinded 
upon hearing it. Once targeted, the target is bolstered against all 
castings of power word blind
. The Effect of the spell depends on the target's level.
12th or Lower
 Blinded permanently.
13th–14th
 Blinded for 1d4 minutes.15th or Higher Dazzled for 1 minute. Heightened (+1) The levels at which each outcome applies 
increase by 2.
POWER WORD KILL
 SPELL 
9 Casting  Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 varies
You utter a word of power that potentially kills 
the target upon hearing it. Once targeted, the target is bolstered 
against all castings of power word kill
. The Effect of the spell depends on the target's level.
14th or Lower
 The target dies instantly.
15th If the target had 50 Hit Points or fewer, it dies instantly; 
otherwise, it drops to 0 Hit Points and gains dying 1 or 
increases its dying condition by 1 if it's already dying.
16th or Higher The target takes 50 damage; if this brings the target to 0 Hit Points, the target dies instantly.
Heightened (+1) The levels at which each outcome applies 
increase by 2.
POWER WORD STUN
 SPELL 
8 Casting  Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 varies
You utter a word of power that can make the target stunned 
upon hearing it. Once targeted, the target is bolstered against all 
castings of power word stun
. The Effect of the spell depends on the target's level.
13th or Lower
 Stunned for 1d6 rounds.
14th–15th
 Stunned for 1 round.
16th or Higher Slowed 1 for 1 round instead of stunned.
Heightened (+1) The levels at which each outcome applies 
increase by 2.
PREPARE FOR BATTLE 
 POWER 
2 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range 10 feet; Targets
 you and one ally
Duration
 24 hours
You converse with an ally to stoke her zeal for battle, or sing 
songs of righteous anger to set up a sympathetic bond. The next 
time you and that ally roll initiative, you both use the higher of 
your two initiative rolls. If you roll initiative, if you use this boon 
again, or if either of you rests, the spell ends.
PRESTIDIGITATION 
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 10 feet; Targets
 one object (cook, lift, or tidy only)Duration
 concentration
Auditory
Death
EnchantmentMentalAuditory
EnchantmentMental 
EnchantmentMental 
CantripEvocation
You can perform simple magical Effects for as long as you 
Concentrate on the Spell. The Effects are minor and have severe 
limitations. Each time you Concentrate on the Spell, you can 
choose one of four options, based on your type of magic.

Ł Cook (arcane, primal) 
Chill, warm, or flavor 1 pound of 
nonliving material.

Ł Lift (arcane, divine, occult)
 Slowly lift an unattended object 
of light Bulk or less 1 foot off the ground.

Ł Make (arcane, divine, occult)
 Create an object of negligible 
Bulk, made of congealed magical substance and temporary 
in nature. The object looks crude and artificial and is 
extremely fragile—it crumbles if put under too much strain 
and can't be used as a tool, weapon, or spell component.

Ł Tidy (arcane, primal)
 Color, clean, or soil an object of light 
or less Bulk. You can aflect an object of 1 Bulk with 10 
rounds of concentration or a larger object, such as a suit of 
armor, with 5 minutes of concentration.
Prestidigitation
 can't deal damage or cause adverse conditions. 
Any actual change to an object (beyond just moving, cleaning, 
coloring, or soiling it) persists only as long as you Concentrate 
on the Spell. PRIMAL HERD
 SPELL 
10
Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 you and up to five willing 
targetsDuration
 1 minute or until dismissedYou transform the targets into a herd of mammoths, and they 
assume a Huge battle form. Each target must have enough space 
to expand into or the spell fails for that target. Targets count as 
animals in addition to their normal traits while in this form. The 
targets' gear is absorbed into their forms; the constant abilities of 
the gear still function, but targets can't activate any item abilities. 
When targets transform, each target gains the following abilities:

Ł AC 41 (TAC 38) and ignores armor's check penalty and 
Speed reduction.

Ł New attacks, which are the only types of attacks they 
can use. They're trained with them. When attacking with 
them, they use their attack modifier with the proficiency 
and item bonus of their most favorable weapon or unarmed 
Strike, and the damage bonus is listed with the attacks. All 
attacks are Strength-based attacks (for the purposes of the 
enfeebled condition, for example).

Ł 20 temporary Hit Points that go away when they leave 
their battle form.

Ł Low-light vision.

Ł Athletics +28 (unless their own total modifiers are higher).
The special statistics of the battle form can be adjusted only 
by penalties, circumstance bonuses, and conditional bonuses. 
The battle form prevents the targets from casting spells, or 
spending most manipulate actions that require hands (the GM 
determines which manipulate actions you can spend if there's 
doubt). Each target can dismiss the spell's Effects on her own by 
using an action (this action has the concentrate trait).
When in battle form, each target gains the attacks, movement 
types, and special abilities listed below.
Polymorph
Transmutation 
247
Ł Mammoth tusk (reach 15 feet), 
Damage 6d8+9 piercing; 
trunk (agile, reach 15 feet), 
Damage 6d6+9 bludgeoning; 
foot (agile, reach 15 feet), 
Damage 6d6+3 bludgeoning; Speed 40 feet; Trample
: As a 3-action activity, you can 
move up to twice your Speed and move through the space 
of Large or smaller creatures, trampling each creature 
whose space you enter. A trampled creature takes foot 
damage based on a Reflex save against your spell DC (half 
damage on a success, no damage on a critical success, full damage on a failure, double damage on a critical failure).
PRIMAL PHENOMENON 
 SPELL 
10
Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
You form a direct connection with the natural world and request 
intercession. Nature always refuses unnatural requests and 
might choose to grant a different request (potentially more 
powerful or better fitting its nature) than the one you asked for. 
A primal phenomenon spell can do any of the following things.

Ł Duplicate any primal spell of 9th level or lower.

Ł Duplicate any non-primal spell of 7th level or lower.

Ł Produce any Effect whose power level is in line with the 
above Effects.
At the GM's discretion, you can try to use 
primal phenomenon to produce greater Effects than these, but doing so may be 
dangerous or the spell may have only a partial Effect.
PRISMATIC SPHERE
 SPELL 
9 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 10 feetDuration
 1 hourThis multicolored sphere functions like a 
prismatic wall
 but is 
shaped in a 10-foot burst centered on a corner within your space. 
You must form the sphere in an unbroken open space so its edges 
don't pass through any creatures or objects or the spell is lost. 
PRISMATIC SPRAY
 SPELL 
7 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 30-foot coneA spray of rainbow light beams cascades from your open hand. 
Each creature in the area must roll 1d8 on the table below to see 
which beam aflects it, then roll a saving throw of the indicated 
type. The table notes any additional traits that apply to each type 
of ray. If a creature is struck by multiple beams, it uses the same 
d20 result for all its saving throws. For all rays, a successful saving 
throw negates the Effect for that creature.
1d8 ColorSave
Efiect (Traits)
1 Red
Reflex
30 fire damage (fire)
2 OrangeRefiex
40 acid damage (acid)3 Yellow
Reflex
50 electricity damage (electricity)4 Green
Fortitude
20 poison damage and enfeebled 1 for 1 minute (poison)5 BlueFortitude
Aflected as if by 
flesh to stoneDivination
Abjuration
Evocation
6 IndigoWillConfused, per the warp mind
 spell (mental)7 VioletWillSlowed 1 for 1 minute; sent 
to another plane, per plane shift, on a critical failure 
(teleportation)
8 Potent beam
—Aflected by two beams—
roll twice, rerolling any 
duplicates or 8s
PRISMATIC WALL
 SPELL 
8 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feetDuration
 1 hour or until dismissedYou create an opaque wall of shimmering, multicolored light. The 
wall is straight and vertical, stretching 60 feet across and 30 feet 
high. You must form the wall in an unbroken open space so its 
edges don't pass through any creatures or objects or the spell is 
lost. You can pass through the wall and ignore its Effects. The wall 
sheds bright light out to 20 feet on each side. Creatures other than 
you that come into the wall's light must succeed at a Will save or 
be blinded for 1 minute. A creature that attempts a save is then 
bolstered against that particular prismatic wall's blinding Effect.
A prismatic wall has seven different colors, each with the Effect 
of a 5th-level 
chromatic wall
 spell of that color. A creature that 
tries to pass through the wall must attempt a saving throw against 
each component wall. The Effects take place simultaneously, so 
a creature turned to stone by the blue wall is still treated as a 
creature for the indigo and violet walls.
The wall as a whole is immune to dispelling Effects of the wall's 
level or lower, but each color must be dispelled by its specific spell, 
as described in chromatic wall
. This must be done in order (red, 
orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, then violet). A given color can't 
be aflected until the previous color is dispelled. Dispelling a color 
wall removes that color's Effect from the wall, and dispelling them 
all ends prismatic wall
.PRIVATE SANCTUM
 SPELL 
4 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Area
 100-foot burstDuration
 24 hours
The area looks like a bank of impenetrable black fog. Sensory 
stimuli (such as sounds, smells, and light) don't pass from inside 
the area to outside the area. Scrying spells can't perceive any 
stimuli from the area, and mind-reading Effects don't work in 
the area.
PRODUCE FLAME
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
A flame appears in your palm. Make a melee or 
ranged touch attack. On a success, you deal 1d4 
fire damage. On a critical success, the target takes 1d4 persistent 
fire damage in addition to the cantrip dealing double damage. 
Heightening this spell increases its damage.
Heightened (3rd)
 1d6 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
Abjuration
Light 
Abjuration
Attack
CantripEvocation
Fire
248 Heightened (5th) 2d6 + your spellcasting ability modifier, and 
double damage + 2d4 persistent fire damage on a critical hit.
Heightened (7th) 3d6 + your spellcasting ability modifier and 
double damage + 3d4 persistent fire damage on a critical hit.
Heightened (9th) 4d6 + your spellcasting ability modifier and 
double damage + 4d4 persistent fire damage on a critical hit.
PROJECT IMAGE
 SPELL 
7 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feetDuration
 concentration up to 1 minute
You project an illusory image of yourself. You must stay within 
range of the image, and if at any point you can't see the image, 
the spell ends. Whenever you Cast a Spell other than an aura 
spell, you can cause the spell Effect to originate from either 
yourself or the image. Because the image is an illusion, it can't 
truly benefit from spells, though any visual manifestations of the 
spell appear. The image has AC equal to your TAC and the same 
saves as you. If it is hit by an attack or fails a save, the spell ends.
Heightened (+2)
 The maximum duration you can Concentrate on 
the Spell increases to 10 minutes.
PROTECTION
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minuteChoose chaotic, evil, good, or lawful when you cast this spell. If 
you choose chaos, this spell gains the lawful trait and vice versa. 
If you choose evil, this spell gains the good trait and vice versa.
The target gains a +1 conditional bonus to their Armor Class against attacks by creatures of the chosen alignment and on 
saving throws against Effects created by such creatures. This 
bonus increases to +3 against Effects from such creatures that 
would directly control the target and against attacks made by 
summoned creatures of the chosen alignment.
PROTECTIVE AURA 
 POWER 
2 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
 Area
 15-foot auraDuration
 1 minuteYou create a 15-foot-radius protective aura. You gain resistance 
equal to half your level to all damage. Your allies also gain this 
resistance while they are within the aura. 
PROTECTIVE WARD
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 10-foot-radius burst centered on you
Duration
 concentration up to 1 minute
You emanate a shimmering aura of protection magic. You and any 
allies in the aura gain a +1 conditional bonus to your Armor Class.
PRYING EYE
 SPELL 
5 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range see text
Duration
 concentration, up to 10 minutes
IllusionMentalAbjuration
Abjuration
Abjuration
Divination
ScryingYou create an invisible, fioating eye, 1 inch in diameter, at a location 
you can see within 500 feet. It sees in all directions with your normal 
visual senses and continuously transmits what it sees to you.
The first time you Concentrate on the Spell each round, you can 
either move the eye up to 30 feet, seeing only things in front of 
the eye or move it up to 10 feet, seeing everything in all directions 
around it. There is no limit to how far from you the eye can move, but 
if you and the eye ever cease to be on the same plane of existence, 
the spell ends immediately. You can attempt Seek actions through 
the eye if you want to attempt Perception checks with it.
PUNISHING WINDS
 SPELL 
8 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 100 feet; Area
 30-foot radius, 100-foot-tall cylinder
Duration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
Violent winds and a powerful downdraft fill the area, forming a 
cyclone. All fiying creatures in the area descend 40 feet. The entire 
area is greater difficult terrain for fiying and difficult terrain for 
creatures on the ground or climbing. Any creature that ends its 
turn fiying within the area descends 20 feet. Any creature pushed 
into a surface by this spell's winds takes falling damage.
The squares at the outside vertical edges of the cylinder prevent 
creatures from leaving. They're greater difficult terrain, and any 
creature attempting to push through must succeed at an Athletics 
check (or Flying Maneuver) against your spell DC to get through. A 
creature that fails ends its current action but can try again.
PURIFY FOOD AND DRINK
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 1 cubic foot of contaminated food or water
You remove toxins and contaminations from food and drink, 
making them safe to consume. This doesn't prevent natural 
decay or spoilage. One cubic foot of liquid is roughly 8 gallons.
PURPLE WORM STING
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
You deal 6d4 piercing damage to the touched 
creature and aflict it with purple worm venom, depending on 
the outcome of its Fortitude save.
Success The target takes 3d6 poison damage. Critical Success The target is unaflected. Failure
 The target is aflicted with purple worm venom at 
stage 1.Critical Failure
 The target is aflicted with purple worm venom 
at stage 2.
Purple Worm Venom (Poison)
 Level 11; 
Maximum Duration
 6 rounds. 
Stage 1 3d6 damage and enfeebled 2 (1 round); 
Stage 2 4d6 damage and enfeebled 2 (1 round); 
Stage 3 6d6 poison and enfeebled 2 (1 round).
PUSHING GUST
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting
Range 500 feet; Targets
 one creature your size 
or smallerAirEvocation
Necromancy
Attack
Necromancy
Poison
AirConjuration
249 Giving the air a push, you assault the target with a powerful gust 
of wind; it must attempt a Fortitude save. 
Failure
 The target is pushed up to 5 feet away from you. 
Critical Failure
 Per failure and the target is also knocked prone. 
QUIVERING PALM
 POWER 
8 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 monthMake a melee unarmed Strike, dealing damage normally. If you 
succeed and the target is alive; any time during the duration you 
can spend a Verbal action to speak a word of death that could 
instantly slay it, depending on its Fortitude save.
Success The target survives, the spell ends, and the target is 
bolstered against it.
Failure
 The target is stunned for 1 round but survives. The 
spell's duration continues, but the target is bolstered 
against being killed by 
quivering palm
 for 24 hours.
Critical Failure
 The target dies. If you cast 
quivering palm
 again, any previous 
quivering 
palm you had cast ends.
RAISE DEAD
 SPELL 
6 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Cost diamonds worth a total value of the target's level 
(minimum 1) × 200 gpRange 10 feet; Targets
 one dead creature of level 13 or lower
You attempt to call forth the dead creature's soul, requiring the 
creature's body be present and relatively intact. The creature 
must have died within the past 3 days. If Pharasma has decided 
Attack
Necromancy
HealingNecromancy
that the creature's time has come (GM's discretion), or if the 
creature doesn't wish to return to life, this spell automatically 
fails, but the diamonds aren't consumed in the casting.
If the spell is successful, the creature is no longer dead 
and returns to life with 1 Hit Point, no spells prepared, no 
points in any pools, and it is still suflering from any long-
term debilitations of the old body. The time spent in the 
Boneyard leaves the character temporarily debilitated, making 
it enervated 2 for 1 week; this condition can't be removed or 
reduced by any means until the week has passed. The creature 
is also permanently changed in some way by their time in the 
afterlife, such as a slight personality shift, a streak of white in 
the hair, or a strange new birthmark.
Heightened (7th) The maximum level of a creature you can 
target increases to 15. The cost increases to the target's level 
(minimum 1) × 400 gp. Heightened (8th) The maximum level of a creature you can 
target increases to 17. The cost increases to the target's level 
(minimum 1) × 800 gp. Heightened (9th) The maximum level of a creature you can 
target increases to 19. The cost increases to the target's level 
(minimum 1) × 1,600 gp. Heightened (10th) The maximum level of a creature you can 
target increases to 21. The cost increases to the target's level 
(minimum 1) × 3,200 gp. RAY OF ENFEEBLEMENT
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Attack
Necromancy
250 Duration
 1 minuteAttempt a ranged touch attack against the target. If you 
succeed, that creature attempts a Fortitude save in order to 
determine the spell's Effect. If you critically succeed at your 
attack roll, the target treats the result of its Fortitude save as 
one degree worse.
Success The target gains enfeebled 1.Critical Success The target is unaflected. Failure
 The target gains enfeebled 2.Critical Failure
 The target gains enfeebled 3.RAY OF FROST
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 60 feet; Targets
 one creature
Make a ranged touch attack against the target. If you 
hit, you deal 1d8 cold damage. Double the damage 
on a critical hit. Heightening this spell increases its damage.
Heightened (3rd)
 The cold damage increases to 1d8 + your 
spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (5th) The cold damage increases to 2d8 + your 
spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (7th) The cold damage increases to 3d8 + your 
spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (9th) The cold damage increases to 4d8 + your 
spellcasting ability modifier.
READ AURA 
 CANTRIPCasting 10 minutes (Somatic, Verbal)
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one objectYou focus on the target object. When the casting is 
complete, you know whether or not that item is magical and, if it 
is, you learn the school of magic (see page 194).
If the object is illusory, you detect this only if the Effect has a 
lower level than the level of your 
read aura
 spell. Heightened (3rd)
 You can target up to 10 objects.
Heightened (6th) You can target any number of objects.
READ FATE
 POWER 
1 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range 10 feet; Targets
 one creature other than you
You attempt to learn more about the target's fate in the short 
term, usually within the next day for a creature living a fairly 
sedentary life, or the next hour or less for someone likely to have 
multiple rapid experiences of note, such as someone actively 
adventuring. You learn a single enigmatic word connected 
to the creature's fate that day. Fate is notoriously fickle and 
inscrutable, and the word isn't necessarily meant to be taken at 
face value, so the meaning is often clear only in hindsight. The 
GM rolls a secret DC 6 flat check (see page 292). If the creature's 
fate is too uncertain, or on a failed flat check, the spell
 results 
in the word "inconclusive." Either way, the creature is bolstered 
against read fate
.READ OMENS
 SPELL 
4 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Choose a particular goal, event, or activity that will 
Attack
CantripColdEvocation
CantripDetectionDivination
Divination
Prediction
Divination
Prediction 
occur within 1 week. You learn a cryptic clue or piece of advice 
that could help with the chosen event, often in the form of a 
rhyme or omen. REGENERATE
 SPELL 
7 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one willing or unconscious living creature
Duration
 1 minuteThe target temporarily gains regeneration 15, which restores 
15 Hit Points to it at the start of each of its turns. While it has 
regeneration, the target can't die from damage and its dying 
value can't exceed 3. If the target takes acid or fire damage, its 
regeneration deactivates until after the end of its next turn.
Each time the creature regains Hit Points from regeneration, 
it also regrows one damaged or ruined organ (if any). During 
the spell's duration, the creature can also reattach severed 
body parts by spending an Interact action to hold the body part 
to the stump. Heightened (9th) The regeneration increases to 20.
REMOVE CURSE
 SPELL 
4 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
You attempt to remove one curse aflicting the target. Treat this 
as counteracting the curse (see page 319). If the curse comes from a cursed item or other external source, a success indicates 
that the target creature can rid itself of the cursed item, but 
doesn't remove the curse from the item.
REMOVE DISEASE
 SPELL 
3 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
You attempt to completely remove one disease aflicting the 
target. Treat this as counteracting the disease (see page 319).
REMOVE FEAR
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
You can counteract a single fear Effect that the target suflers 
from. This can also remove nonmagical fear Effects if the source's 
level is equal to or lower than double 
remove fear's
 level. 
This frees only the target, not any other creatures under the 
fear Effect. Heightened (6th)
 The spell's range increases to 30 feet, and you 
can target up to 10 creatures.
REMOVE PARALYSIS
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
You can counteract a single Effect infiicting paralysis on the 
creature. This does not cure someone who suflers paralysis from 
some natural state or Effect, such a being paralyzed from birth or 
paralysis caused by nonmagical wounds or toxins.
Heightened (6th)
 The spell's range increases to 30 feet, and you 
can target up to 10 creatures.
HealingNecromancy
HealingNecromancy
HealingNecromancy
EnchantmentHealingNecromancy
251 REPULSION SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range aura up to 40 feetDuration
 1 minuteFrom you extends an aura that prevents creatures from 
approaching you. When casting the spell, you can make the field 
any radius you choose, up to 40 feet. Creatures must attempt 
a Will save if they're in the aura when you cast the spell or as 
soon as they enter the aura while it's in Effect. Once a creature 
has attempted the save, it uses the same result for that casting 
of repulsion
. Any restrictions on a creature's movement apply 
only if it moves voluntarily toward you. For example, if you move 
closer to a creature, it doesn't then need to move away.
Success The creature treats each square in the aura as difficult 
terrain when is moving closer to you.
Critical Success The creature's movement is not restricted.
Failure
 The creature can't move closer to you while in the aura.
RESILIENT SPHERE
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one Large or smaller creature
Duration
 1 minuteYou create an immobile sphere of force around the target's space 
to either trap or protect it, blocking anything that would cross 
through the sphere. The sphere has AC 5, TAC 5, and Hardness 
10. It can take 2 extra Dents and is destroyed when broken. 
Disintegrate
 destroys the sphere instantly. The spell's duration 
ends when the sphere is destroyed. If the target is unwilling, the 
Effects of the sphere depend on the target's Reflex save.
Success The target disrupts the sphere's integrity, so the 
sphere functions normally but begins with 3 Dents.
Critical Success The target disrupts the sphere, causing it to 
collapse entirely.
Failure
 The sphere has its normal Effect.
RESIST ENERGY
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minuteChoose acid, cold, electricity, fire, or sonic damage. The target 
and its gear gain resistance 5 against the damage type you chose.
Heightened (4th) The resistance increases to 10, and you can 
target up to two creatures.
Heightened (7th) The resistance increases to 15, and you can 
target up to five creatures.
RESPLENDENT MANSION
 SPELL 
9 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range 500 feetDuration
 24 hours (see text)
You conjure a towering mansion up to four stories tall and up to 
300 feet on a side. While casting the spell, you hold an image of 
the mansion and its desired appearance in your mind. The mansion 
can contain as many or as few rooms as you desire, and it is 
decorated as you imagine it. You can imagine a purpose for each 
room of the mansion, and the proper accouterments appear within. 
Abjuration
MentalAbjuration
Force
Abjuration
Conjuration
Any furniture or other mundane fixtures function normally for 
anyone inside the mansion, but they cease to exist if taken beyond 
its walls. No fixture created with this spell can create magical 
Effects, but magical devices brought into the mansion function 
normally.
Your mansion contains the same types of foodstufls and 
servants as created by the 
magniflcent mansion spell. Each of the mansion's exterior doorways and windows are 
protected by 
alarm spells. You choose whether each alarm is 
audible or mental as you cast the spell, and each has a different 
sound (for an audible alarm) or sensation (for a mental one), 
allowing you to instantly determine which portal has been used.
When you prepare spells, you can choose not to recover the 
spell slot or daily spell you used to cast this spell. If you do, the 
mansion remains for another 24 hours.
The mansion must be created on a plot of land free of other 
structures. It adapts to the natural terrain, adopting the structural 
requirements for being built there. The mansion adjusts around small 
features such as ponds or spires of rock, but can't be created on 
water or other nonsolid surfaces. If created on snow, sand dunes, or 
other soft surfaces with a solid surface underneath, the foundation 
reaches the solid ground. If created on a solid but unstable surface, 
such as a swamp or an area plagued by tremors, there's a 10% chance 
each day the mansion begins to sink or collapse.
The mansion doesn't harm creatures within the area when it 
appears, and it can't be created within a crowd or in a densely 
populated area. Any creature inadvertently caught inside the 
mansion when the spell is cast ends up unharmed inside the 
complete mansion and always has a clear path of escape.
RESTORATION
 SPELL 
2 Casting 10 minutes (Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
When you cast 
restoration, choose to either reduce a condition or 
lessen the Effect of a toxin. A creature can benefit from only one 
restoration
 spell each day, and it can't benefit from 
restoration
 more 
than once to reduce the stage of the same exposure to a given toxin.

Ł Reduce a Condition
 Reduce the value of the target's 
enfeebled, sluggish, or stupefied condition by 2. You can 
instead reduce two of the listed conditions by 1 each.

Ł Lessen a Toxin
 Reduce the stage of one toxin the target 
suflers from by one stage. This can't reduce the stage below 
stage 1 or cure the afliction.
Heightened (4th) Add drained to the list of conditions you can 
reduce. When you lessen a toxin, reduce the stage by two. You 
also gain a third option that allows you to reduce the target's 
enervated value by 1. You can't use this to reduce a permanent 
enervated condition.
Heightened (6th) Per the 4th-level 
restoration, but you can 
reduce a permanent enervated condition if you add a Material 
Casting action while casting the spell, during which you provide 
100 gp worth of diamond dust as a cost.
RESTORE SENSES
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
HealingNecromancy
HealingNecromancy
252 You can counteract a single Effect making the target blinded 
or deafened. This can counteract both temporary magic and permanent consequences of magic, but it doesn't cure someone 
who is missing the sense from some natural state or Effect, such 
as from birth or from a nonmagical wound or toxin.
Heightened (6th) The spell's range increases to 30 feet, and 
you can target up to 10 creatures. You can choose the Effect to 
counteract separately for each selected creature.
RETRIBUTIVE PAIN
 POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic reaction; 
Trigger
 A creature in 
retributive pain's range deals damage to you.
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
You vengefully reflect a portion of your pain upon your tormentor. 
The mental damage you deal is equal to half the damage the 
target dealt to you with the triggering Effect, to a maximum of 10 
mental damage. This damage decreases or increases depending 
on the target's Fortitude save. 
Success Half damage. Critical Success No damage. Failure
 Full damage. Critical Failure
 Double damage (this can exceed 10 mental 
damage) Heightened (+1) The maximum mental damage increases by 5.
RETROCOGNITION SPELL 
7 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Duration
 concentration, up to 10 minutes
This spell allows you to gain impressions from past events 
that occurred in your current location. 
Retrocognition
 reveals 
impressions from events that occurred over the course of the 
last day throughout the first minute of the duration, followed 
by impressions from the next day back the next minute you 
concentrate, and so on. If you witness a traumatic or turbulent 
event through an impression, you lose concentration on the spell 
unless you succeed at a Will save with a DC of 30–35, depending 
on the severity of the event. The GM determines whether an event 
is traumatic and chooses the DC.
Heightened (8th) You gain impressions of events that occurred 
over the previous year for each minute you concentrate, instead 
of the previous day, though the details diminish, making it harder 
to distinguish impressions from all but the most major events.
Heightened (9th) You gain impressions of events that occurred 
over the previous century for each minute you concentrate, 
instead of the previous day, though the details diminish, making 
it almost impossible to distinguish impressions from all but the 
most major events.
REVERSE GRAVITY
 SPELL 
7 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Area
 20-foot radius, 40-foot-tall cylinder
Duration
 1 minuteYou reverse gravity in the area. Creatures and objects that aren't 
secured to the ground immediately fall upward to the top of 
the area. A creature might be able to Grab an Edge to arrest its fall 
Abjuration
MentalNonlethalDivination
Evocation
if it falls past an appropriate edge. If a creature falls against a solid 
object (such as a ceiling), it takes the appropriate amount of falling 
damage and lands on the surface. Once an object or creature 
reaches the top of the area, it fioats, caught between the normal 
and reversed gravity. The creature can move along the plane 
where the two forms of gravity meet. Creatures that can levitate or 
fiy can use those abilities to mitigate the Effects of 
reverse gravity
.When reverse gravity
 ends, all creatures and objects caught in 
the area fall back down. Likewise, anything that moves beyond 
the bounds of the spell's area is subjected to normal gravity again.
REVIVAL
 SPELL 
9 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 dead creatures and living 
creatures of your choice in range
Duration
 concentration, up to 10 rounds
All living targets regain Hit Points equal to 9d8 plus your 
spellcasting ability modifier. In addition, you return any number 
of dead targets to life temporarily, with the same Effects as 
raise 
dead and the same limitations. The resurrected creatures have a 
number of temporary Hit Points equal to the amount of healing 
you gave living creatures (instead of having full HP). The revived 
creatures can't regain Hit Points, and once 
revival's duration 
ends, they lose all temporary Hit Points and die. 
Revival
 can't 
resurrect creatures killed by 
disintegrate
 or a death Effect. It has 
no Effect on undead. RIDICULOUS NOTION
 POWER 
5 Casting  Verbal Casting
Area
 30-foot auraDuration
 1 round
You speak a phrase so absurd that it can cause creatures to 
laugh. Each target must attempt a Will saving throw. A target 
is bolstered against your 
ridiculous notion once it succeeds at its 
save or once the duration ends if it fails the save.
Success Unaflected. Failure
 The target breaks into a paroxysm of laughter. It's 
slowed 1 and can't make reactions.
Critical Failure
 The target laughs so hard it falls prone and 
can't use any actions, reactions, or free actions.
RIGHTEOUS MIGHT
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting; 
Requirements
 You have a deity.
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedYou focus all your divine energy into transforming yourself into a 
battle form, similar to your normal form but armed with powerful 
divine armaments granted by your deity. Your gear is absorbed 
into your form; the constant abilities of your gear still function, 
but you can't activate any items. When you transform, you gain 
the following.

Ł AC 27 (Touch 24) and ignore your armor's check penalty 
and Speed reduction

Ł A special attack with a righteous armament version of your 
favored weapon, which is the only type of attack you can 
use. When attacking with the special weapon, your attack 
HealingNecromancy
EmotionEnchantmentMentalPolymorph
Transmutation
253modifier is +20 and your damage bonus is +4 (or +2 for a 
ranged attack). Use four of your weapon's normal damage 
dice, or one damage die higher if your weapon is a simple 
weapon with a d4 or d6 damage die. The weapon has 
one of the following properties that matches your deity's 
alignment: anarchic, axiomatic, holy, unholy. If your deity 
is true neutral, you instead gain access to the weapon's 
critical specialization Effect. 

Ł 10 temporary Hit Points that go away when you leave your 
battle form.

Ł Resistance 3 against physical damage.

Ł Darkvision.
Ł Speed of 40 feet.
Ł Athletics +20 unless your own total modifier is higher.
The special statistics of your battle form can be adjusted only 
by penalties, circumstance bonuses, and conditional bonuses. 
Your battle form prevents you from casting spells or using most 
actions with the manipulate trait that require your hands (the 
GM determines which manipulate actions you can spend if 
there's doubt). You can dismiss this spell by using an action (this 
action has the concentrate trait).
Heightened (8th) Your battle form is Large, your attacks have 
10-foot reach or 15-foot reach if your deity's favored weapon is 
a reach weapon. You must have enough space to expand into or 
the spell is lost. Your transformed statistics are as follows: AC 
33 (Touch 29); attack modifier of +26; five dice of damage with 
a damage bonus of +5; 15 temporary HP; resistance
 4 against physical damage; Athletics of +26.
ROPE TRICK
 SPELL 
4 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 one touched piece of rope 
from 5 to 30 feet long
Duration
 8 hoursYou cause the target rope to rise vertically into the air. Where it 
ends, an extradimensional space springs up, connected to the top 
of the rope. This space can be reached only by climbing the rope.
The entrance to the space can't be seen, and it can be 
pinpointed only by the presence of the rope. The rope can't 
be removed or hidden, though it can be detached from the 
extradimensional space by pulling it with 16,000 pounds of 
weight, critically succeeding at an Athletics check against the 
spell's DC, or destroying the rope. The space holds up to eight 
Medium creatures and their gear. A Large creature counts as 
two Medium creatures, a Huge creature counts as four Medium 
creatures, and a Gargantuan creature fills the space on its own.
If the rope is detached or destroyed or if a creature attempts 
to enter the space that would put it over its capacity, the space 
begins to unravel. It disappears in 1d4 rounds, depositing the 
creatures within safely on the ground below.
SAFEGUARD SECRET 
 POWER 
2 Casting 1 minute (Somatic, Verbal)
Range 10 feet; Targets
 you and any willing allieSCHoose one piece of information that at least some of the targets 
know; aflected allies must remain within range for the full minute 
Conjuration
Extradimensional 
SpaceAbjuration
Mental 
during which you cast the spell. This grants those who know the 
piece of knowledge you have chosen a +4 conditional bonus to skill 
checks (typically Deception checks) to conceal this knowledge and 
to saving throws against spells that specifically attempt to obtain 
this knowledge from them or against Effects that would force them 
to reveal it. These bonuses last until you use this power again.
SANCTIFIED GROUND
 SPELL 
3 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Cost 1 vial of holy water
Area 
30-foot burst centered on you
Duration
 24 hours
You sanctify the area, sprinkling it with holy water and preparing 
it to make a stand against your foes. Choose aberrations, 
celestials, dragons, fiends, or undead. All creatures in the area 
gain a +1 conditional bonus to AC, attack rolls, damage rolls, and 
saving throws against the chosen creatures.
SANCTUARY
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedCreatures attempting to attack the target must attempt a Will 
save each time, with outcomes depending on their saves. If the 
target acts in a hostile manner, the spell is dismissed.
Success The creature can attempt its attack and any other 
attacks against the target this turn.
Critical Success Sanctuary is dismissed. Failure
 The creature can't attack the target and wastes the action. 
It can't attempt further attacks against the target this turn.
Critical Failure
 The creature wastes the action and can't attempt 
to attack the target for the rest of 
sanctuary's duration.
SAVOR THE STING
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting,  Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
You revel in your target's pain. If you succeed at a 
touch attack, your target takes 1d6 mental damage 
(double damage on a critical hit) and becomes sick with pain 
depending on its Will save. As long as the target is sick, you gain a +1 
conditional bonus to attack rolls and skill checks against the target.
Success The target does not become sick. Failure
 The target is sick 1 and takes 1 persistent mental damage as long as it's sick.
Critical Failure
 Per failure, but the target is sick 2.
Heightened (+1) The initial damage increases by 1d6 and the 
persistent damage increases by 1.
SCINTILLATING PATTERN
 SPELL 
8 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting
Range 120 feet; Area
 20-foot burstDuration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
A field of vibrant, ever-changing colors manifests in the air. 
Creatures are dazzled while inside the pattern. A creature must 
attempt a Will saving throw if it is inside the pattern when you 
cast it, enters the pattern, ends its turn within the pattern, or 
Abjuration
Consecration
Abjuration
Attack
EnchantmentMentalNonlethal 
IllusionVisual254uses a Seek or Interact action on the pattern. A creature currently 
aflected by the pattern doesn't need to attempt new saves.
Success Unaflected. Failure
 The target is confused for 1d4 rounds.
Critical Failure
 The target is stunned for 1d4 rounds. After the 
stun ends, the target is confused for the remaining duration 
of the spell. SCRYING
 SPELL 
6 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range planetary; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 concentration, up to 10 minutes
Scrying works like 
clairvoyance, except that the image you 
receive is less precise (insufficient for 
teleport and similar spells) and instead of creating an eye in a set location within 500 feet, 
you instead create an eye that appears just above the target. 
You can choose a target either by name or by touching one of its 
possessions or a fallen piece of its body. If you haven't met the 
target in person, scrying's DC is 2 lower, and if you are unaware 
of the target's identity (perhaps because you found an unknown 
creature's fang at a crime scene), the DC is instead 10 lower.
The Effect of scrying depends on the target's Will save.
Success The spell fails and the target is bolstered against 
scrying. Critical Success The spell fails and the target is bolstered 
against scrying for 1 week. The target also gains a glimpse 
of you and learns its rough distance and direction from you.
Failure
 The spell succeeds. Critical Failure
 The spell succeeds, and the eye follows the 
target if it moves, traveling up to 60 feet per round.
SEARING LIGHT
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Targets
 one creature
You shoot a blazing-hot ray of light tinged with 
holy energy. Make a ranged touch attack against 
the target. If you hit, you deal 4d6 fire damage. If 
the target is a fiend or undead, you deal 4d6 additional good 
damage to it. On a critical hit, double all the damage. If the light passes through an area of magical darkness or 
targets a creature aflected by magical darkness, 
searing light attempts to dispel the darkness. If you need to determine 
whether the light passes through an area of darkness, draw a 
line between you and the spell's target.
Heightened (+2)
 The fire damage by 3d6 and the good damage 
against fiends and undead increases by 3d6.
SECRET PAGE
 SPELL 
3 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 one page up to 3 square feet 
in size
Duration
 unlimitedYou change the target's text to different text entirely. If the text is 
a spellbook or a scroll, you can change it to show a spell you know 
of secret page's level or lower, though the replacement spell cannot 
be cast or used to prepare a spell. You can also transform the text 
into some other text you have written or have access to. You can 
Divination
ScryingAttack
Evocation
Fire
GoodLightIllusionVisualspecify a password that allows any creature touching the book to 
change the text back and forth. You must choose the replacement 
text and the password, if any, when you cast the spell.
SEE INVISIBILITY
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 10 minutesYou can see invisible creatures and objects. They appear to you as 
translucent shapes, and you treat them as if they were concealed.
Heightened (5th) The spell has a duration of 8 hours.
SENDING SPELL 
5 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range planetary; Targets
 one familiar creature
You send the creature a message of 25 words or fewer, and it can 
respond immediately with its own message of 25 words or fewer.
SHADOW BLAST
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range varies;
 Area
 varies
You shape the mutable and quasi-real substance of the Shadow 
Plane into a deadly blast. Choose acid, bludgeoning, cold, electricity, fire, piercing, or slashing, and choose a 30-foot cone, 
a 15-foot burst within 120 feet, or a 50-foot line. The blast deals 5d8 damage of the type you chose to creatures in the area; these 
creatures must attempt their choice of a Reflex or Will save.
Success Half damage. Critical Success No damage. Failure
 Full damage. Critical Failure
 Double damage. Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d8.
SHADOW SIPHON
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Verbal reaction; 
Trigger
 a spell or magical Effect deals damageRange 60 feet; Targets
 the triggering spellYou transform the triggering spell into a partially illusory version 
of itself. Treat this as a dispel attempt, except that if the dispel 
attempt is successful, any creatures that would be damaged by 
the spell instead take only half as much damage. Treat 
shadow 
siphon's
 counteract level as 2 higher for this dispel attempt.
SHADOW WALK
 SPELL 
5 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 you and up to nine willing 
creatures touched
Duration
 8 hours or until dismissedThe targets enter the edge of the Shadow Plane, where it borders 
the Material Plane. Targets can't see the Material Plane while on 
the Shadow Plane, and while on the Shadow Plane, they are 
exposed to potential encounters with that plane's denizens. The 
shadows on the border between the planes bend space, speeding 
up your movement with respect to the Material Plane. Every 3 
minutes the targets travel along this border, they move as far as 
they would through the Material Plane in 1 hour. At any point, 
Divination
Revelation
Divination
Evocation
Shadow
IllusionShadow
Conjuration
Shadow
Teleportation 
255a target can dismiss the spell's Effects, although this aflects 
only that target. The shadow bending is inexact, so when the 
spell ends, the targets appear roughly 1 mile from their intended 
location on the Material Plane (though those who are traveling 
together appear together).SHAPE STONE
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 cube of stone 10 feet across 
or smallerYou shape the stone into a rough shape of your choice; it can't 
include intricate parts, fine details, moving pieces, or the like. 
Any creature standing atop the stone when you reshape it must 
attempt an Acrobatics check.
Success Unaflected. Failure
 The creature falls prone.
Critical Failure
 The creature falls off the stone (if applicable) 
and falls prone.
SHAPE WOOD
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 an unworked piece of wood 
up to 20 cubic feet in volume
You shape the wood into a rough shape of your choice; it can't 
include intricate parts, fine details, moving pieces, or the like.
SHAPECHANGE
 SPELL 
9 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedYou transform yourself into any form you could choose with a 
different polymorph spell you know of 7th level or lower. You 
choose the type of creature as you cast the spell rather than 
when you prepare it. You can Concentrate on the Spell to change 
your form to any other form you could choose with this spell. 
You can dismiss this spell by using an action (this action has the 
concentrate trait).
SHIELD CANTRIPCasting  Verbal Casting
Duration
 until your next turn or until dismissed
You raise a magical shield of force to protect you. 
This counts as using the Raise a Shield action (see the sidebar) to gain a +1 circumstance bonus to AC until the start of your next 
turn, though it doesn't require a hand to use.
While the spell is in Effect, you can also use the Shield Block 
reaction with your magic shield. The shield has Hardness 4. After 
you use Shield Block, the spell is dismissed and you can't cast it 
again for 10 minutes. Unlike a normal Shield Block, you can use 
the spell's reaction against the 
magic missile spell. Heightening the spell increases the Hardness.
Heightened (3rd)
 Hardness 10.
Heightened (5th) Hardness 15.
Heightened (7th) Hardness 20.
SHIELD OTHER
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
EarthTransmutation
PlantTransmutation
Polymorph
Transmutation
Abjuration
CantripForce
Necromancy
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 10 minutes or until dismissedThe target's essence and your own become linked. The 
target takes half damage from all sources that deal Hit Point 
damage, and you take the remainder of the damage. When you 
take damage through this link, don't apply any resistances, 
weaknesses, and the like that you have to that damage; you 
simple take that amount of damage. The spell is dismissed if the 
target is ever more than 30 feet away from you.
SHIFTING FORM 
 POWER 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedYou gain one of the following abilities of your choice. You can dismiss 
this spell by using an action (this action has the concentrate trait).

Ł Accelerated 10.

Ł Swim Speed equal to half your Speed.

Ł Darkvision.
Ł You gain a pair of claws. These are agile unarmed attacks that 
deal 2d6 slashing damage. You're an expert with these attacks.

Ł Scent 60 feet. SHILLELAGH 
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one nonmagical club or stafl you are holding
Duration
 1 minuteThe target grows vines and leaves, brimming with primal energy. 
The target gains the Effects of a +1 weapon potency rune
 in your hands, gaining a +1 item bonus to attack rolls and dealing 
another die of damage on a hit. Additionally, as long as you are 
on your home plane, attacks you make with the target against 
aberrations, extraplanar creatures, and undead deal a third die 
of damage on a hit. MorphTransmutation 
PlantTransmutation
SHIELD ACTIONS
The shield spell works like a shield, which grants bonuses to AC 
and TAC. You can use these actions while 
shield is active.
 RAISE A SHIELD
Requirements
 You are wielding a shield. 
You position your shield to protect you. When you have Raised 
a Shield, you gain its bonus to AC and TAC as circumstance 
bonuses and you can use the Shield Block reaction (below). Your 
shield remains raised until the start of your next turn.
 SHIELD BLOCK
Trigger
 While you have your shield raised, you take damage from 
a physical attack.
You snap your shield in place to ward off a blow. Your shield 
prevents you from taking an amount of damage up to the 
shield's Hardness—the shield takes this damage instead, possibly 
becoming dented or broken. See the Item Damage section on 
page 175 for rules on dented and broken items.
256 SHOCKING GRASP
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
On a hit, the target takes electricity damage 
equal to 1d12 plus your spellcasting ability modifier. If the 
target is wearing metal armor or is made of metal, you gain 
a +1 circumstance bonus to your attack roll with 
shocking 
grasp
 and the target takes 1d4 persistent electricity damage 
on a hit. On a critical hit, double the damage, but not the 
persistent  damage. Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d12 and the 
persistent electricity damage increases by 1.
SHRINK SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one willing creature
Duration
 1 minuteThe target shrinks to size Tiny. Its equipment shrinks with it, 
but returns to natural size if removed. The creature's reach 
changes to 0 feet. This spell has no effect on a Tiny creature.
Heightened (6th) As 2nd level, but the spell can target up to 
10 creatures instead of just one.
SHRINK ITEM
 SPELL 
3 Casting 10 minutes (Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 one nonmagical object up 
to 20 cubic feet in volume and up to 80 Bulk
Duration
 1 day or until dismissed
You shrink the target to roughly the size of a coin. This reduces 
it to negligible Bulk. You can dismiss the spell with a Verbal 
Casting action or by tossing the object onto a solid surface. 
The object can't be used to attack or cause damage when it 
returns to normal size. If there isn't room for the object to 
return to normal size when the spell ends, the spell's duration 
continues until the object is in a location large enough to 
accommodate its normal size.
SIGIL CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature or object
Duration
 unlimited (see below)
You harmlessly place your unique magical sigil, which is about 
1 square inch in size, on the touched creature or object. The 
mark can be visible or invisible, and you can change it from 
one state to another by spending a Somatic Casting action 
during which you touch the target.
The mark can be scrubbed or scraped off with 5 minutes of 
work. If it's on a creature, it fades naturally over the course of 
a week. The time before the mark fades increases depending 
on your level.
Heightened (3rd)
 1 month. Heightened (5th) 1 year.
Heightened (7th) The sigil never fades.
SILENCE SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Attack
ElectricityEvocation
Polymorph
Transmutation
Polymorph
Transmutation
CantripTransmutation
IllusionRange touch; Targets
 one willing creature
Duration
 1 minuteThe target makes no sound, preventing creatures from 
noticing it using hearing. The target can't use sonic attacks, 
nor can it use actions with the auditory trait. (This prevents it 
from casting spells that include Verbal Casting actions.)
Heightened (4th) The silence effect emanates from the 
touched creature, silencing all sound in or passing through a 
10-foot radius and preventing any auditory and sonic effects 
in the affected area. While within the radius, creatures are 
subject to the effects listed above. Depending upon the 
position of the effect, a creature might be able to notice the 
lack of sound reaching it. For example, if the 
silence effect 
blocks a corridor leading to a noisy party, a creature might 
notice those sounds abruptly cease. SKIN OF THORNS
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting,  Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minuteYour body sprouts a coat of brambly thorns. Adjacent creatures 
that hit you with a melee attack, as well as creatures that hit 
you with unarmed strikes, take 1 piercing damage each time 
they do.
Heightened (+1) The piercing damage increases by 1.
SLEEP SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Area
 5-foot burstEach target in the area becomes drowsy and might fall asleep, 
depending on its Will save. A creature that falls asleep from 
this spell doesn't fall prone or drop what it's holding. This spell 
doesn't prevent creatures from waking up due to a successful 
Perception check, making it of limited use mid-combat. 
Success –1 conditional penalty to Perception checks for 
1 round.
Critical Success Unaffected. Failure
 It falls asleep. If it's still asleep after 1 minute, it 
wakes up automatically.
Critical Failure
 It falls asleep. If it's still asleep after 1 hour, 
it wakes up automatically.
Heightened (3rd)
 The targets fall into a deep slumber for 1 
round on a failure and 1 minute on a critical failure. They fall 
prone and drop what they're holding, and they can't attempt 
Perception checks to wake up. After the listed amount of time, 
the creature is in normal sleep.
SLOW
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minuteThe target becomes slower, depending on its Fortitude save.
Success Slowed 1 for 1 round.
Critical Success The target is unaflected. Failure
 Slowed 1 for 1 minute.
Critical Failure
 Slowed 2 for 1 minute.
Heightened (6th) You can target up to 10 creatures.
EnchantmentMental 
EnchantmentMentalTransmutation
257 SOLID FOG
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Area
 20-foot burstDuration
 1 minute or until dismissedPer 
obscuring mist, except that the area is also difficult terrain.
SOOTHE
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one willing or unconscious living creature
Duration
 1 minuteYou grace the target's mind, boosting its mental defenses and healing 
its wounds. The target regains Hit Points equal to 1d6 plus your 
spellcasting ability modifier when you Cast the Spell and gains a +1 
conditional bonus to saves against mental Effects for the duration.
Heightened (+1) The amount of healing increases by 2d6.
SOOTHING BALLAD
 POWER 
7 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 you and up to nine allies
You draw upon the power of your muse to soothe 
your allies. Choose one of the following three Effects:

Ł The spell attempts to counteract fear Effects 
on the targets.
Ł The spell
 attempts to counteract paralysis Effects on the 
targets.
Ł Soothing ballad 
restores Hit Points equal to 7d6 plus your 
spellcasting ability modifier to the targets. Conjuration
Water
HealingMentalNecromancy
Positive
Bard
CompositionEmotionEnchantmentHealingMentalHeightened (8th): When healing, soothing ballad restores Hit 
Points equal to 8d6 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (9th): When healing, soothing ballad restores Hit 
Points equal to 9d6 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
SOOTHING WORDS
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one allyYou attempt to calm the target by uttering soothing 
words. Attempt to counteract one emotion Effect on the target.
SOUND BURST
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Area
 10-foot burstYou deal 2d8 sonic damage to creatures in the area, depending 
on their Fortitude saves.
Success Half damage. Critical Success No damage. Failure
 Full damage and deafened for 1 round.
Critical Failure
 Double damage and deafened for 1 minute. Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d8.
SPEAK WITH ANIMALS
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 10 minutesYou can ask questions of, receive answers from, and use the 
Diplomacy skill with animals. The spell doesn't make them more 
friendly than normal. Wary and cunning animals are likely to be 
terse and evasive; less intelligent ones often make inane comments.
EmotionEnchantmentMental 
Evocation
SonicDivination
258 SPEAK WITH PLANTS
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 10 minutesYou can ask questions of and receive answers from plants, but the 
spell doesn't make them more friendly or intelligent than normal. 
Most normal plants have a limited and distinctive view of the world 
around them, so they don't recognize details about creatures or 
know anything about the world beyond their immediate vicinity. 
Wary and cunning plant monsters are likely to be terse and 
evasive, while less intelligent ones often make inane comments.
SPECTRAL HAND
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feetDuration
 1 minuteYou create a semicorporeal hand out of your essence that 
delivers touch spells for you. Whenever you Cast a Spell with a 
range of touch, you can have the hand crawl to a target within 
range along the ground, touch it, and then crawl back to you. 
When making a melee touch attack with the hand, you use your 
normal bonuses. The hand can move as far as it needs to within 
range, and its movement doesn't trigger reactions. The hand has 
your AC and saves, but any damage to the hand destroys it and 
causes you to take 1d6 damage.
SPELL IMMUNITY
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 24 hourSCHoose a spell and name it aloud as part of the Verbal Casting 
action. Spell immunity
 attempts to dispel that spell (see page 
197) whenever 
spell immunity's target is the target of the named 
spell or in that spell's area. Successfully dispelling a spell that 
targets an area or multiple targets with 
spell immunity negates 
the Effects only for spell immunity's target.
SPELL TURNING
 SPELL 
7 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 hourThis abjuration reflects spells cast at you back at their caster. 
When a spell targets you, you can spend a reaction to have 
spell turning attempt to reflect it. This works like dispelling the spell, 
but if the spell is successfully dispelled, the Effect is turned back on the caster. Whether or not the dispel attempt is successful, 
spell turning ends. Spell turning can't aflect spells that aren't 
targeted (such as area spells).
If spell turning reflects a spell back at a caster who also is 
under the Effect of 
spell turning, his spell turning can attempt to 
reflect his own spell back at you again; if he does so, his dispel 
attempt automatically succeeds.
SPELLWRACK
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
You cause any spells cast on the target to spill out 
their energy in harmful surges, depending on the target's Will save.
Divination
PlantNecromancy
Abjuration
Abjuration
Abjuration
CurseForce
Success Per failure, but the curse (and any persistent force 
damage from the curse) ends on its own after 1 minute.
Critical Success The target is unaflected. Failure
 Whenever the target becomes aflected by a spell with 
a duration, the target takes 1d12 persistent force damage, 
and each time she takes persistent force damage from 
spellwrack
 she reduces the remaining duration of spells 
aflecting her by 1 round. An Arcana check at 
spellwrack's 
DC is required to lower the DC of the flat check for the 
persistent damage from 20 to 15.
Critical Failure
 Per failure, but the persistent force damage 
is 2d12.SPIDER CLIMB
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 10 minutesThe target gains a climb Speed of 25 feet. SPIDER STING
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
You deal 1d4 piercing damage to the touched 
creature and aflict it with spider venom, depending on its 
Fortitude save.
Success The target takes 1d4 poison damage. Critical Success The target is unaflected. Failure
 The target is aflicted with spider venom at stage 1.
Critical Failure
 The target is aflicted with spider venom at 
stage 2.Spider Venom (Poison)
 Level 1; 
Maximum Duration
 4 rounds. 
Stage 1 1d4 poison damage and enfeebled 1 (1 round); 
Stage 2 1d4 poison damage and enfeebled 2 (1 round).
SPIRIT BLAST 
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
You concentrate ethereal energy and attack a creature's spirit, 
dealing 12d6 force damage. It must attempt a Fortitude save. 
Because spirit blast aflects the creature's spirit, it can damage 
a target projecting its consciousness or possessing another 
creature even if the target's body is elsewhere. The possessed 
creature isn't harmed by the blast. The blast doesn't harm 
creatures that have no spirit, such as constructs.
Success Half damage. Critical Success No damage. Failure
 Full damage. Critical Failure
 Double damage. Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
SPIRITUAL EPIDEMIC
 SPELL 
8 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 varies
You lay a curse on the target, sapping its spirit and leaving a 
contagious trap in its spiritual essence for those who contact it. Transmutation
Attack
Necromancy
Poison
Necromancy
CurseNecromancy
259
The results depend on the target's Will save. Any creature that 
casts a divine or occult spell on the target while it's aflected must 
also attempt a Will save as if targeted, and the curse continues 
to spread in this way. 
Success Enfeebled 2 for 1 round.
Critical Success The target is unaflected. Failure
 Enfeebled 2 for 1 minute, enfeebled 1 permanently.
Critical Failure
 Enfeebled 3 for 1 minute, enfeebled 2 permanently.
SPIRITUAL GUARDIAN
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting; 
Requirements 
You have a deity.
Range 120 feetDuration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
A Medium guardian made of pure magical force manifests 
and attacks foes you designate within range. This guardian is 
ghostly and translucent and appears to be holding your deity's 
favored weapon.
When you cast the spell, the spiritual guardian appears in 
an unoccupied space next to a foe of your choice within range 
and makes a Strike against it. Each time you Concentrate on 
the Spell, you can move the spiritual guardian to an unoccupied 
space next to a new target within range (if you choose to do so 
and make a Strike with it. The guardian uses and contributes 
to your multiple attack penalty. Alternatively, when you 
Concentrate on the Spell, you can have the guardian move 
adjacent to an ally and protect that ally. If you do, each time 
the ally would take damage, the guardian takes the first 10 
damage instead of your ally. It continues to do so until you 
move the guardian to attack an enemy or defend a different 
ally or until the guardian is destroyed (it has 30 Hit Points and 
can't recover Hit Points by any means). The guardian can't take 
damage except when protecting an ally, though 
disintegrate 
automatically destroys it if it hits the spiritual guardian's
 TAC 
of 25. 
Attacks with the guardian use your attack modifier with 
that type of weapon but use your spellcasting ability modifier 
instead of the normal ability modifier. Regardless of the 
weapon's appearance, the guardian deals force damage equal 
to 1d10 plus your spellcasting ability modifier. When you 
Strike with the guardian, you can choose to deal damage of 
the normal damage type of the weapon it holds instead of force 
damage (or any of the available damage types for a versatile 
weapon). No other attributes of the weapon apply, and even 
a ranged weapon attacks adjacent creatures only. A spiritual 
guardian's weapon counts as a weapon for triggers, resistances, 
and so forth. The guardian takes up space and grants fianking (even with 
a ranged weapon), but it doesn't have any other attributes a 
creature would normally have, aside from Hit Points, and 
creatures can move through its space without hindrance. The 
guardian can't make any kind of attack other than a normal 
Strike, and feats or spells that aflect weapons or enhance allies 
do not apply to the guardian's attacks.
Heightened (+2) The guardian's damage increases by 1d10 and its 
Hit Points increases by 10.
Attack
Abjuration
Force
SPIRITUAL WEAPON
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting; 
Requirement
 You must have a deity.
Range 120 feetDuration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
A weapon made of pure magical force manifests and attacks foes 
you designate within range. This weapon is ghostly and appears 
as your deity's favored weapon.
When you cast the spell, the weapon appears next to a foe 
of your choice within range and makes a Strike against it. Each 
time you Concentrate on the Spell, you can move the weapon to 
a new target within range (if you choose to do so) and make a 
Strike with it. The spiritual weapon uses and contributes to your 
multiple attack penalty.
Attacks with the weapon use your attack modifier with 
that type of weapon, but substitute your spellcasting ability 
modifier instead of the normal ability modifier. Regardless of its 
appearance, the weapon deals force damage equal to 1d8 plus 
your spellcasting ability modifier. When you Strike with the 
weapon, you can deal damage of the normal damage type of the 
weapon instead of force damage (or any of the available damage 
types for a versatile weapon). No other attributes of the weapon 
apply, and even a ranged weapon attacks adjacent creatures only. 
A spiritual weapon counts as a weapon for triggers, resistances, 
and so forth. The weapon doesn't take up space, grant fianking, or have any 
other attributes a creature would. The weapon can't make any 
kind of attack other than a normal Strike, and feats or spells that 
aflect weapons do not apply to this weapon.
Heightened (+2) The weapon's damage increases by 1d8.
STABILIZE 
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one dying creature
A single touch shuts death's door. The target goes 
from 0 Hit Points to 1 Hit Point.
Heightened (4th) You also reduce the target's dying value by 1.
STATUS
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one willing living creature
Duration
 1 day
As long as you and the target are on the same plane of existence 
and both alive, you know the target's direction from you, its 
distance from you, and any conditions aflecting it.
Heightened (4th) The spell's range increases to 30 feet, and you 
can target up to 10 creatures.
STINKING CLOUD
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Area
 20-foot burstDuration
 1 minuteYou create a cloud of mist in the area that makes creatures within 
concealed. (The concealment is not a poison Effect.) A creature 
that ends its turn within the cloud must attempt a Fortitude save.
Success Sick 1.Attack
Evocation
Force
CantripHealingNecromancy
Positive
DetectionDivination
Conjuration
Poison
260 Critical Success The target is unaflected. Failure
 Sick 1, and slowed 1 until it leaves the cloud.
Critical Failure
 Sick 2, and slowed 1 until it leaves the cloud.
STONE TELL
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 10 minutesYou can ask questions of and receive answers from natural or 
worked stone. While stone is not intelligent, you speak with the 
natural spirits of the stone, which have a personality colored by 
the type of stone, as well as by the type of structure the stone is 
part of, for worked stone. A stone's perspective, perception, and 
knowledge give it a worldview different enough from a human's 
that it doesn't consider the same details important. Stones can 
mostly answer questions about those that touched them in the 
past and what is concealed beneath them.
STONE TO FLESH
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 petrified creature or human-
sized stone object
You restore a petrified creature to its normal state or transform a 
stone object into a mass of inert flesh (without stone's Hardness) 
in roughly the same shape.
STONESKIN
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 20 minutesThe target's skin hardens like stone. It gains resistance 5 to 
physical damage (any bludgeoning, piercing, or slashing damage) 
and weakness 5 to adamantine. Each time the target is hit by 
a bludgeoning, piercing, or slashing attack, 
stoneskin's duration 
decreases by 1 minute.
Heightened (6th) The resistance and weakness increase to 10.
Heightened (8th) The resistance and weakness increase to 15.
STORM LORD
 POWER 
9 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area 
100-foot spread
Duration 
concentration, up to 1 minute or until 
dismissedThe sky above you darkens in a matter of moments, swirling with 
ominous clouds punctuated by fiashes of lighting. Each round 
when you concentrate on this spell, you can select one of the 
following Effects to occur in the area.

Ł Calm No additional Effect.
Ł Fog
 Heavy fog rolls in, concealing the area per 
obscuring mist.
Ł Rain Torrential rain falls from the clouds above, dousing 
ordinary flames. Creatures in the area take a –2 penalty to 
Acrobatics and Perception checks.

Ł Wind Powerful winds buflet the area in all directions. 
Ranged attacks take a –4 penalty and all fiying is against 
the wind and counts as moving through difficult terrain.
In addition, once per round you can use a Somatic Casting action 
to call down a bolt of lightning from above, striking any target in 
Divination
Earth 
EarthTransmutation
Abjuration
AirElectricityEvocation 
range that you can see. You deal 10d6 electricity damage to the 
target, depending on their Reflex save.
Success Half damage. Critical Success No damage. Failure
 Full damage and the target is deafened for 1 round.
Critical Failure
 Double damage and the target is deafened for 1 round.
If you cast this spell underground or inside a structure, it has 
no Effect. STORM OF VENGEANCE
 SPELL 
9 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 800 feet; Area
 360-foot burstDuration
 concentration, up to 10 rounds
A massive storm cloud forms in the air in a 360-foot burst. Beneath 
it, rain begins to fall, and whipping winds impose a –4 circumstance 
penalty to physical ranged attacks and weapon ranged attacks. 
When you cast this spell and the first time each round you 
Concentrate on the Spell, you can choose one of the following 
storm Effects. You can't choose the same one twice in a row.

Ł Acid Rain
 Each creature in the storm takes 3d8 acid damage 
with no saving throw.

Ł Hail The storm deals 3d10 bludgeoning damage to creatures 
beneath it. A successful Fortitude save reduces the damage 
to half (no damage on a critical success).
Ł Lightning Up to 10 bolts of lightning strike down, targeting 
creatures of your choice in the storm. No more than one bolt 
can target any one creature. Each bolt deals 5d6 electricity 
damage ( half damage on a successful Reflex save, no damage 
on a critical success, and double damage on a critical failure).

Ł Rain and Wind Heavy rain and whipping wind reduce 
visibility and mobility, making the area under the storm 
cloud concealed and difficult terrain.
Ł Thunderclap
 Each creature in the storm must succeed at 
a Fortitude save or be deafened for 10 minutes. A creature 
that succeeds is bolstered against thunderclaps from the 
same storm of vengeance
 spell. Heightened (10th) The range increases to 2,200 feet and the 
cloud is a 1,000-foot burst. STORMWIND FLIGHT
 POWER 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minutePowerful winds carry you through the air, giving you a fiy Speed 
of 30 feet. When this spell's duration would end, if you have Spell 
Points, you can spend 1 Spell Point to increase the duration by 
1 minute. Otherwise, if you're still fiying, you fioat to the ground, 
per feather fall. Heightened (6th) Your fiy Speed from 
stormwind flight doesn't 
count fiying against the wind as difficult terrain. SUDDEN SHIFT
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic free action; 
Trigger
 An enemy 
misses you with a melee attack.
You Step; your new position must remain in that enemy's reach. 
AirElectricityEvocation
MorphTransmutation
Abjuration
Move
261 SUGGESTION SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 varies
You suggest a course of action to the target, which must 
be phrased in such a way as to seem like a logical course 
of action to the target and can't be self-destructive or 
obviously against the target's self-interest. The target's 
response depends on its Will save.
Success The target is unaflected and thinks you were talking 
to them normally, not casting a spell on them.
Critical Success The target is unaflected and knows you tried 
to control it.
Failure
 The target immediately follows your suggestion. The 
spell has a duration of 1 minute, or until the target has 
completed a finite suggestion or the suggestion becomes self-destructive or has other obvious negative Effects, at 
which point the spell is dismissed. Critical Failure
 Per failure, but the duration is 1 hour or 
until dismissed. Heightened (8th) You can target up to 10 creatures.
SUMMON MONSTER
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feetDuration
 concentration, up to 1 minute or until dismissed
You summon a level 0 creature from the 
summon monster list. This 
creature fights for you until the spell ends. The creature gains the 
summoned trait. The spell automatically ends if the monster's Hit 
Points drop to 0. Summoned creatures have 2 actions per turn 
(which they use when you Concentrate on the Spell) and can't 
use reactions. The creature attacks your enemies to the best of 
its abilities. If you can communicate with it, you can attempt to 
command it as part of your action to Concentrate on a Spell, but 
the GM determines the degree to which it follows your commands.
Heightening the spell increases the maximum level of monster 
you can summon. You can always summon a monster of a lower 
level than the spell allows.
Heightened (2nd) Level 1.
Heightened (3rd)
 Level 2.
Heightened (4th) Level 3.
Heightened (5th) Level 5.
Heightened (6th) Level 7.
Heightened (7th) Level 9.
Heightened (8th) Level 11.
Heightened (9th) Level 13.
Heightened (10th) Level 15.
SUMMON NATURE'S ALLY
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feetDuration
 concentration, up to 1 minute or until dismissed
You summon a level 0 creature from the 
summon nature's ally
 list. 
This creature fights for you until the spell ends. The creature gains 
EnchantmentLinguisticMentalConjuration
Conjuration
the summoned trait. The spell automatically ends if the monster's 
Hit Points drop to 0. Summoned creatures have 2 actions per turn 
(which they use when you Concentrate on the Spell) and can't 
use reactions. The creature attacks your enemies to the best of 
its abilities. If you can communicate with it, you can attempt to 
command it as part of your action to Concentrate on a Spell, but 
the GM determines the degree to which it follows your commands.
Heightening the spell increases the maximum level of monster 
you can summon. You can always summon a monster of a lower 
level than the spell allows.
SUMMON LISTSThe following monsters appear in the 
Pathfinder Playtest Bestiary, which can be found at 
paizo.com
. They can be summoned using 
the listed level of spell. The level number subheading indicates the 
levels of the monsters that follow.
SUMMON MONSTER1st: Level 0: 
Animated broom, bloodseeker, bobcat, dog, dire rat, 
fire beetle, pig, pony, viper
2nd: Level 1: 
Animated bureau, imp devil, mephit elemental, quasit 
demon3rd
: Level 2: 
Animated armor, lemure devil, sloth demon
4th: Level 3: 
Animated statue, hell hound, minor elemental
5th: Level 5: 
Lesser elemental; 
Level 4:
 bearded devil
6th: Level 7: 
Blood demon, major elemental; Level 6:
 lust demon, nightmare, salamander
7th: Level 9: 
Bone devil, efreeti genie, greater elemental, wrath 
demon; Level 8:
 erinyes devil
8th: Level 11: 
Elder elemental, toad demon; 
Level 10: 
barbed devil, 
slaver demon
9th: Level 13: 
Ice devil, treachery demon; 
Level 12: 
slime demon, valkyrie
10th: Level 15: 
Phoenix; Level 14:
 boar demonSUMMON NATURE'S ALLY
1st: Level 0: 
Bloodseeker, bobcat, dog, dire rat, fire beetle, pig, 
pony, viper
2nd: Level 1:
 Constrictor snake, electric eel, goblin dog, horse, 
hunting spider, hyena, leopard, mephit elemental, wolf
3rd
: Level 2: 
Blue shark, boar, crocodile, deinonychus, giant bat, 
giant snake, panther, pteranodon, warg, warhorse
4th: Level 3:
 Ankhrav, bunyip, cockatrice, dryad, giant scorpion, 
grizzly bear, hyaenadon, lion, minor elemental
5th: Level 5: 
Lesser elemental, redcap, smilodon; 
Level 4:
 great 
white shark, tiger6th: Level 7: 
Quetzalcoatlus pterosaur; 
Level 6:
 ankylosaurus, cave 
bear, shambler, smilodon tiger
7th: Level 8: 
Greater elemental, megalodon, roc, giant anaconda, 
mastodon, treant
8th: Level 11: 
Elder elemental, goliath spider; 
Level 10:
 tyrannosaurus9th: Level 13: 
Purple worm; 
Level 12: 
rusalka, sea serpent10th: Level 15: 
Phoenix262 Heightened (2nd) Level 1
Heightened (3rd)
 Level 2.
Heightened (4th) Level 3.
Heightened (5th) Level 5.
Heightened (6th) Level 7.
Heightened (7th) Level 9.
Heightened (8th) Level 11.
Heightened (9th) Level 13.
Heightened (10th) Level 15.
SUNBURST SPELL 
7 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 500 feet; Area
 60-foot burstA globe of searing sunlight explodes in the area, 
dealing 7d8 fire damage to creatures and objects 
in the area, plus 7d8 additional positive damage to undead 
creatures. Creatures and objects in the area must attempt a 
Reflex save.
Success Half damage. Critical Success No damage. Failure
 Full damage. Critical Failure
 Full damage and blinded permanently.
If the globe overlaps with an area of magical darkness or aflects 
a creature aflected by magical darkness, 
sunburst attempts to 
dispel the darkness Effect. Heightened (+1) The fire damage increases by 1d8 and the 
positive damage against undead increases by 1d8.
SWAMP OF SLOTH
 POWER 
3 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Verbal Casting, 
 Somatic Casting
Range 120 feet; Area
 20-foot burstDuration
 1 minuteGround in the area turns swampy and fetid, like an Abyssal 
mire. The area is difficult terrain, but not deep enough to 
require or allow swimming. The sludge at the bottom of the 
morass animates into Diminutive sludge beasts with a demonic 
appearance. These don't function as normal creatures, but they 
swarm over creatures in the swamp and exude a noxious stench. 
The swamp deals 1d6 poison damage to any creature that ends 
its turn there, depending on its Fortitude save.
Heightened (4th) The damage increases to 2d6.
Heightened (6th) The damage increases to 3d6.
Heightened (8th) The damage increases to 4d6.
SWEET DREAMS 
 POWER 
1 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 one willing sleeping creature
Duration
 8 hoursYou protect the target's dreams from malevolent influences and 
fill them with positive and restful images. The target gains a 
+4 conditional bonus to saves against magic that attacks their 
dreams, such as 
nightmare
. As long as they aren't actively 
using their dreams, such as with 
dream council 
or dreaming 
potential, they also recover 1 additional Hit Point per level for 
their 8-hour rest.
Evocation
Fire
LightPositive
Conjuration
EnchantmentMentalSYNAPTIC PULSE
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 30-foot auraDuration
 1 round
You emit a pulsating mental blast through the minds of all 
enemies in the area, with Effects depending on their Will saves.
Success Slowed 1 for 1 round.
Critical Success Unaflected. Failure
 Slowed 2 for 1 round.
Critical Failure
 Stunned for 1 round.
SYNESTHESIA SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minuteThe target's senses are acutely rewired in unexpected ways, 
causing them to process noises as bursts of color, smells as 
sounds, and so on. This has three Effects, depending on the 
target's Will save.

Ł Due to the distraction, the target must succeed at a DC 5 
flat check each time it uses a concentrate action or reaction, 
or that action or reaction fails.

Ł The reprocessing of the target's visual senses make all 
creatures and objects concealed from it.

Ł The creature has trouble moving Effectively, making it 
sluggish 3 and hampered 10 feet.
Success The target is aflected for 1 round.
Critical Success The target is unaflected. Failure
 The target is aflected for 1 minute. Critical Failure
 Per failure, and the target is stunned for 1 
round as it attempts to process the sensory shifts.
Heightened (9th) You can target up to five creatures.
TAKE ITS COURSE 
 POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
 Range touch; Targets
 one diseased or poisoned creature touched
You advance one of the target's toxins to progress to the point that 
the target needs to attempt its next saving throw. If the target is 
aflected by more than one toxin, you can choose from among the 
toxins you are aware of; otherwise choose randomly. Against an 
unwilling creature, you must hit it with a melee touch Strike. On a 
willing or unconscious creature or on a critical hit against an unwilling 
creature, you can grant the creature either a +2 conditional bonus or 
a –2 conditional penalty to its saving throw against the toxin.
TALKING CORPSE
 SPELL 
4 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 one corpseDuration
 10 minutesYou grant the corpse a semblance of life, which it uses to speak 
the answers to three questions. This uses the physical body's 
latent memories rather than calling back the deceased's spirit, 
so the corpse must be mostly intact. The more damage it has 
taken, the more inaccurate or patchwork its answers, and it 
must have a throat and mouth to speak at all. If anyone has 
previously cast this spell on the corpse in the last week, the spell 
EnchantmentMentalDivination
MentalNecromancy
Necromancy
263automatically
 fails. The corpse can attempt a Will save to resist 
the questions as if it were the original creature at its time of 
death, with the following Effects.
Success The target can lie or refuse to answer your questions.
Critical Success The target can lie or refuse to answer your 
questions, and the target's spirit haunts you throughout 
the day, bothering you and causing you to be unable to gain 
any rest for 1 day.
Failure
 The target must answer truthfully, but its answers can 
be brief, cryptic, and repetitive. It can still mislead you or 
attempt to stall so that the spell's duration runs out before 
you can ask all your questions.
Critical Failure
 Per failure, but the target's answers are more 
direct and less repetitive, though still cryptic. It takes a –2 
conditional penalty to Deception checks to deceive you.
TANGLEFOOT 
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
A vine covered in sticky sap appears from thin air, 
fiicking from your hand and lashing itself to the target. Attempt 
a ranged touch attack against the target.
Success The target is entangled. It can attempt an Acrobatics 
or Athletics check against your spell DC to remove the 
entangled condition (and immobile condition, if necessary).Critical Success Per success, and the target immobile as long 
as it's entangled.
Failure
 No Effect. Heightened (2nd) The entangled condition lasts for 2 rounds.
Heightened (4th) The entangled condition lasts for 1 minute. TANGLING CREEPERS 
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 500 feet; Area
 40-foot burstDuration
 10 minutesDense, twitching creepers sprout from every surface and fill any 
bodies of water in the area. Any creature moving on the land, 
climbing, or swimming within the creepers is entangled until it 
leaves the area. Once per round, you can Concentrate on the Spell 
to have a vine lash out from any square within the expanse of 
creepers. This vine has a 15-foot reach and makes a melee touch 
attack using your bonus. If the attack succeeds, the vine pulls 
the target into the creepers and makes it immobile for 1 round 
or until the creature Escapes (using your spell DC as the Escape 
DC), whichever comes first.
TELEKINETIC HAUL
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Targets
 one object weighing up to 500 pounds 
and with no dimension longer than 20 feetDuration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
When you cast this spell, you move the target up to 20 feet, 
potentially suspending it in midair. When you Concentrate on 
the Spell, you can do so again, and you can choose a different 
eligible target. CantripConjuration
PlantConjuration
PlantEvocation
TELEKINETIC MANEUVER
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
With a rush of telekinetic power, you move a foe or 
something they carry. You attempt to Disarm, Shove, or Trip the 
target. Make a spell roll instead of an Athletics check.
TELEKINETIC PROJECTILE 
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
You hurl a loose, unattended object in range at the 
target. The spell gains the trait of a damage type appropriate to the 
object (bludgeoning, piercing, or slashing). Make a ranged attack 
against the target. If you hit, you deal 1d10 damage of the given 
type; you deal double damage on a critical hit. No special traits or 
magic properties of the hurled item aflect the attack or damage. 
You can heighten the spell to hurl more objects, though you 
attempt only one attack roll and target only one creature, and 
your salvo of projectiles deals damage all at once for the purposes 
of resistances, weaknesses, and the like. Only one damage type 
applies regardless of how many objects you hurl.
Success Full damage. Critical Success Double damage. Heightened (3rd)
 The damage increases to 1d8 + your 
spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (5th) You hurl two objects at once, dealing total 
damage equal to 2d10 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (7th)
 You hurl three objects at once, dealing total 
damage equal to 3d10 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (9th) You hurl four objects at once, dealing total 
damage equal to 4d10 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
TELEPATHIC BOND
 SPELL 
5 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 you and up to four willing 
creatures touched
Duration
 8 hoursThe targets can communicate telepathically with any or all of the 
other targets from any point on the same planet.
TELEPATHY
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 10 minutesYou can communicate telepathically with all 
creatures within 30 feet. The communication is two-way once 
you have established a connection by communicating with a 
creature. You can communicate only with creatures that share 
a language with you.
Heightened (6th) Telepathy
 loses the linguistic trait. You can 
communicate telepathically with creatures using shared mental 
imagery even if you don't share a language.
TELEPORT
 SPELL 
6 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range 100 miles; Targets
 you and up to four willing 
creatures touched
Attack
Evocation
Force
Attack
CantripEvocation
Divination
Mental 
Divination
LinguisticMentalConjuration
Teleportation
264 You and the targets instantly transport to any location within 
range, as long as you can identify the location precisely both 
by its position relative to your starting position and by its 
appearance. Incorrect knowledge of the location's appearance 
usually causes the spell to fail, but it could lead to teleporting to 
an unwanted location or some other unusual mishap determined 
by the GM.
Teleport
 is not precise over great distances. The targets 
appear at a distance from the intended destination equal 
to roughly 1% of the total distance traveled, in a direction 
determined by the GM. For short journeys, this lack of precision 
is irrelevant, but journeys of the maximum 100 miles are 1 mile 
off target. Heightened (7th) You and the targets can travel to any location 
within 1,000 miles. Heightened (8th) You and the targets can travel to any location 
on the same planet. If you travel more than 1,000 miles, you 
arrive only 10 miles off target.
Heightened (9th) You and the targets can travel to any location 
on another planet within the same solar system. Assuming 
you have accurate knowledge of the location's position and 
appearance, you arrive on the new planet 100 miles off target.
Heightened (10th) Per the 9th-level version, but you can travel to 
any planet within the same galaxy.
TEMPEST SURGE
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature
You surround a foe in a swirling storm of violent 
winds, roiling clouds, and crackling lightning. The storm deals 
1d10 electricity damage to the target, depending on their Reflex 
saving throw.
Success Half damage. Critical Success No damage. Failure
 Full damage, and the target is sluggish 1 for 1 round.
Critical Failure
 Double damage, and the target is sluggish 2 for 1 round.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d10.
TEMPT FATE
 POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic free action; 
Trigger
 You or an 
ally within range attempts a saving throw.
Range 120 feet; Targets
 you or a willing ally in range
If the triggering saving throw's result is a success, it counts 
as a critical success. If it's a failure, it counts as a critical 
failure, and the critical failure can't be reduced by abilities 
that usually reduce critical failure, such as improved evasion. 
If the triggering ability did not have both a critical success and 
critical failure condition, 
tempt fate fails and your Spell Point 
is refunded.
TENTACULAR LIMBS
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minuteYour arms turn into long, pliable tentacles, increasing your reach 
with melee touch attacks and unarmed Strikes you make with 
Air,
ElectricityEvocation
Divination
Fortune
MorphTransmutation 
your arms (such as fist and claw Strikes) to 10 feet. This doesn't 
change the reach of your melee weapon attacks.
THUNDER SHIELD
 POWER 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration 
concentration, up to 1 minute or until 
dismissedYou become surrounded by a cloud of swirling fog, punctuated 
by occasional sparks of lightning and thunderous booms. You 
become concealed, but take a –2 penalty to Stealth checks. 
You deal electricity damage equal to 3d6 plus your spellcasting 
ability modifier to any creature that hits you with an unarmed 
attack or with a non-reach weapon. 
Success Half damage. Critical Success No damage. Failure
 Full damage and the target is deafened for 1 round.
Critical Failure
 Double damage and the target is deafened for 1 round.
Heightened (6th) The damage increases to 5d6.
Heightened (8th) The damage increases to 7d6.
TIDAL SURGE
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting
Range 60 feet; Targets
 one creature
You call forth a wave to move the target either in a body of 
water or on the ground. The result depends on the target's 
Fortitude save. 
Failure
 You move the target 5 feet in any direction along the 
ground or through the body of water. 
Critical Failure
 You move the target up to 10 feet in any 
direction along the ground or through the body of water.
TIME STOP
 SPELL 
10
Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
You temporarily stop time for everything but you, allowing 
you to use an incredible number of actions in a short period 
of time. Immediately after casting 
time stop, you can use up to 
9 actions in three sets of up to 3 actions each. After each set 
of actions, 1 round passes, but only for you, Effects specifically 
targeting or aflecting you, and Effects you create during the 
stoppage. All other creatures and objects are invulnerable to 
your attacks, and you can't target or aflect them with anything. 
Once you have finished your actions, time begins to fiow again 
for the rest of the world. If you had created an Effect whose 
duration extends past the end of the spell, such as a 
wall of fire, it immediately aflects others again as normal, though it doesn't 
have any of the Effects that normally happen when you first 
cast the spell. TONGUES
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 10 minutesThe target can understand the meaning of the words of all 
languages as well as speak the languages of other creatures. 
AirElectricityEvocation
Evocation
Water 
Transmutation
Divination
265 When in a mixed group of creatures, each time she speaks, 
the target can choose a creature and speak in a language that 
creature understands, even if she doesn't know what language 
that is.
TOUCH OF IDIOCY
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one living creature
Duration
 1 minuteYou dull the target's mind with a melee touch attack. On a 
success, the target is stupefied 2.TOUCH OF OBEDIENCE
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one living creature
Duration
 1 round
You erode the target's willpower with a melee touch attack, 
making it easier to control.
Success Stupefied 1. Critical Success Stupefied 1, and it takes a –2 conditional 
penalty to Will saves against mental Effects.
Failure 
The target is unaflected. TOUCH OF SHADOWS
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature 
You cloud your target's vision in swirling shadows 
with a melee touch attack. The Effect depends on your attack roll.
Success The target is dazzled for 1 round.
EnchantmentMentalAttack
EnchantmentMentalAttack
Evocation
Shadow
Critical Success The target is dazzled for 1 minute. Failure
 The target is unaflected. TOUCH OF UNDEATH 
 POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one living creature
You attack the target's life force with the taint of 
undeath via a melee touch attack, dealing 2d8 negative damage. 
The Effect depends on your attack roll.
Success The target takes full damage, and positive Effects 
heal the target only half as much as normal for 1 round.
Critical Success The target takes double damage, and positive 
Effects can't heal the target for 1 round and heal the target 
only half as much as normal for 1 minute. Failure
 The target is unaflected. Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d8.
TREE SHAPE
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 8 hoursYou transform into a Large tree. Perception checks don't reveal 
your true nature, but a successful Nature or Survival check against 
your spell DC reveals that the tree is new to the area. While in tree 
form, you can observe everything around you, but you can't act 
other than by using an action (this action has the concentrate trait) 
to end the spell, which ends your turn. As a tree, your AC is 20; 
your TAC is 12; and only conditional bonuses, conditional penalties, 
circumstance bonuses, and circumstance penalties aflect you. You 
treat successes and critical successes on Reflex saves as failures.
Attack
Necromancy
Negative
Polymorph
Transmutation
266 TREE STRIDE
 SPELL 
5 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
You step into a living tree with a trunk large enough 
to fit you and instantly teleport to any tree of the same species 
within 5 miles that also has a sufficiently large trunk. Once you 
enter the first tree, you instantly know the rough locations of 
other sufficiently large trees of the same species within range 
and can leave from the original tree, if you prefer. You can't carry 
extradimensional spaces with you; if you attempt to do so, the 
spell fails. Heightened (6th) The destination tree can be up to 50 miles away.
Heightened (8th) The destination tree can be up to 500 miles away.
Heightened (9th) The destination tree can be anywhere on the 
same planet, though you are unlikely to find a tree of the same 
species on a noncontiguous continent. TRIPLE TIME
 CANTRIPCasting  Somatic Casting
Area
 60-foot auraDuration
 1 round
You dance to a lively tempo, speeding up your 
allies' movement. You and all allies in range are 
accelerated 10 for 1 round.
TRUE SEEING
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minuteYou can see things within 60 feet as they actually are. The GM 
rolls a secret dispel check against any illusion or transmutation 
in the area, but only for the purpose of determining whether 
you see through it (for instance, if the check succeeds against 
a polymorph spell, you can see the creature's true form, but you 
don't end the 
polymorph spell).TRUE STRIKE
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Verbal Casting
Duration
 until the end of your turn
The next time you make an attack roll before the end of your 
turn, roll the attack twice and use the better result. The attack 
ignores circumstance penalties to the attack roll and any miss 
chance due to the target being concealed or sensed. UNCONTROLLABLE DANCE
 SPELL 
8 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 varies
The target is overcome with an all-consuming urge to dance, 
depending on its Will save. For the duration of the spell, the 
target is flat-footed and can't use reactions. While aflected, the 
creature can't use any move actions other than to dance by using 
the Stride action to move up to half its Speed.
Success The spell's duration is 3 rounds, and the target must 
spend at least 1 action per turn dancing.
Critical Success The target is unaflected. Failure
 The spell's duration is 1 minute, and the target must 
spend at least 2 actions per turn dancing.
Conjuration
Teleportation 
CantripCompositionEmotionEnchantmentMental 
Divination
Revelation
Divination
Fortune
EnchantmentMentalCritical Failure
 The spell's duration is 1 minute, and the target 
must spend all its actions each turn dancing. UNDEAD'S BANE
 POWER 
1 Casting  Verbal free action; 
Trigger
 You cast a 
heal spell to damage undead creatures.
Increase the amount the amount of damage dealt by your level 
(apply this increase after halving, if applicable). If you're healing 
living creatures and damaging undead, only the damage increases.
UNDETECTABLE ALIGNMENT
 SPELL 
2 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 one creature or object
Duration
 1 day
The target registers as neutral to all Effects that would detect 
its alignment. UNFATHOMABLE SONG
 SPELL 
9 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Targets
 up to five creatures
Duration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
Fleeting notes of a strange and unnatural song 
fill the air, overtaking the mind. Each target must 
attempt a Will save when you cast the spell, and again each 
time you Concentrate on the Spell. A creature needs to attempt 
only save against the song each round, and you have to keep 
the same targets when you Concentrate on the Spell.
Success Unaflected this round, but can be aflected on 
subsequent rounds.
Critical Success Unaflected, can't be aflected on subsequent 
rounds, and bolstered against 
unfathomable song. Failure
 Roll 1d4 on the table below.
Critical Failure
 Roll 1d4+1 on the table below.
Roll
Efiect1 Frightened 2
2 Confused for 1 round
3STupefied 4 for 1 round
4 Blinded for 1 round
5STunned 1 round and stupefied 1 for an unlimited duration
UNFETTERED PACK
 SPELL 
7 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 up to 10 creatures
Duration
 1 hourTargets can't be entangled or hampered by vegetation, rubble, 
winds, or other properties of the environment, whether or not 
the environment is magical. They also ignore difficult terrain 
from such environmental properties.
Heightened (9th) The targets also ignore greater difficult terrain 
from environmental properties.
UNIMPEDED STRIDE
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic free action; 
Trigger
 You use a 
Step or Stride action. You can ignore magical impediments to your movement as if you 
Necromancy
Abjuration
Auditory
EmotionEnchantmentFear
MentalAbjuration
Transmutation
267benefited from the 
freedom of movement
 spell. This doesn't let 
you escape being grabbed, restrained, tied up, or bound, from 
either mundane or magical means. UNITY POWER 
2 Casting  Verbal reaction; 
Trigger
 You and one or 
more allies within range are targeted by a spell or 
ability that allows a saving throw.
Range 30 feetYou allow your allies within range to use your saving throw 
modifier instead of their own. Each ally decides individually 
which modifier to use. UNLIFE'S BLESSING
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic free action; 
Trigger
 You cast a 
harm spell to heal an undead creature. 
Increase the amount healed by 2 Hit Points per die. If you're both 
healing undead and damaging living creatures, the healing is 
increased by that amount but the damage is not.
UNRELENTING OBSERVATION
 SPELL 
8 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 100 feet; Area
 20-foot burst; Targets
 one creature or object and up to five willing creatures
Duration
 1 hourThis spell grants perfect sight based on scrying, allowing subjects 
to track the exact movements or position of one creature or object. 
Choose one target creature or object in the area to be tracked. It 
becomes the sensor for the spell. Up to five willing creatures of 
your choice in the area can see a ghostly image of this creature or 
object when it's out of their sight. They can perceive the creature 
or object perfectly, allowing them to ignore invisibility or the 
concealed condition, though physical barriers still provide cover.
The tracking creatures can see the tracked creature or object 
through all barriers other than lead or running water, which block 
their vision. Distance also doesn't matter, though the creature or 
object might move so far away it becomes too small to perceive. 
You don't scry any of the environment around the creature or 
object, though you do see any gear a creature is wearing or 
holding and can tell if it removes objects from its person.
If you try to track an unwilling creature, the Effect depends 
on its Will save.
Success The spell ends after 1 round.
Critical Success The creature or object is unaflected.
Failure
 The other targets track the creature or object.
UNSEEN SERVANT
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 60 feetDuration
 concentration, up to 1 minute or until dismissed
You summon an unseen servant (see the sidebar), which you 
can command as part of Concentrating on the Spell. It serves 
you until the duration expires; until its Hit Points drop to 0 or 
below, at which point the spell is dismissed; or until you lose 
concentration. The unseen servant gains the summoned trait.
Abjuration
Fortune
Necromancy
Divination
ScryingConjuration
UNUSUAL ANATOMY
 POWER 
5 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minuteYou transform your flesh and organs into a bizarre amalgam 
of glistening skin, rough scales, tufts of hair, and tumorous 
protuberances. This has three Effects:

Ł You gain resistance 10 to precision damage and resistance 
10 to extra damage from critical hits. If the resistance 
is greater than the extra damage, it reduces the extra 
damage to 0 but doesn't reduce the attack's normal 
damage. Any creature attacking you should calculate the 
normal damage and extra damage separately while your 
anatomy is altered.

Ł You gain darkvision.

Ł Acid oozes from your skin. Any creature that hits you with 
an unarmed attack or with a non-reach weapon takes 2d6 
acid damage. Heightened (+2) The resistances increase by 5 and the acid 
damage by 1d6.
VAMPIRIC EXSANGUINATION
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 30-foot coneYou draw blood and life force from creatures and 
shoot it out through your outstretched arms. You deal 10d6 
negative damage to living creatures in the area, based on their 
Fortitude saves. 
Success Half damage. Critical Success No damage. Failure
 Full damage. Critical Failure
 Double damage. You gain half as many Hit Points as the maximum damage done 
to any single creature aflected by this spell.
Heightened (+2) The damage increases by 3d6.
Polymorph
Transmutation
Death
Necromancy
Negative
UNSEEN SERVANT
Use this stat block for an unseen servant.
UNSEEN SERVANT
 CREATURE 
0 Perception
 +0, darkvisionLanguages — (understands its creator)
Skills –2, Stealth +8
Str –4, Dex
 +2, Con +0, Int –5, 
Wis +0, Cha +0 Invisible An unseen servant is invisible, though it normally 
doesn't sneak, allowing it to be sensed.
AC 13, TAC
 13; Fort 
+0, Ref 
+4, Will +0 HP 4; Immunities asleep, disease, mental, nonmagical attacks, 
paralysis, poison, precision; 
Resistances
 all damage 5 (except 
force or ghost touch)
Speed fiy 30 feetForce Body
 An unseen servant's physical body is made of force, 
and it can't use attack actions. It can move and use Interact actions 
to do things such as fetch objects, open unstuck or unlocked doors, 
hold chairs, and clean. It can't pass through solid objects.
MediumMindless268 VAMPIRIC TOUCH
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one living creature
You deal 3d6 negative damage to the target 
(double damage on a critical hit). You gain 
temporary Hit Points equal to the negative damage the target 
takes (after applying resistances and the like). You lose any 
remaining temporary Hit Points after 1 minute.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d6.
VEIL SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 up to 10 creatures
Duration
 1 hour or until dismissedYou disguise the targets as other creatures of the same body 
shape and roughly similar height (within 6 inches) and weight 
(within 50 pounds). The disguise can hide the targets' identities 
or let them appear to be of another ancestry, but it's not good 
enough to impersonate specific individuals. The spell doesn't 
change voice, scent, or mannerisms. You choose the disguise for 
each target, so you could make one appear to be a dwarf and 
another an elf, for example.
Casting veil
 counts as setting up a disguise for the purpose of 
the Impersonate action. It ignores any circumstance penalties 
the targets might take for being disguised as a dissimilar 
creature, and it also gives the targets a +4 conditional bonus to 
Deception checks to prevent others from seeing through their 
disguises. You can dismiss any or all of these disguises with a 
Verbal Casting action.
Heightened (5th) The spell also disguises the targets' voices and 
scents, gaining the auditory trait. Heightened (7th) The targets can appear as any creature of the 
same size, even specific individuals. You must have seen an 
individual to reproduce their appearance. The spell also disguises 
the targets' voices and scents, gaining the auditory trait.
VEIL OF CONFIDENCE
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
 Duration
 1 minuteYou surround yourself in a veil of confidence, causing fear 
to slide off you as long as the veil lasts. Reduce your current 
frightened condition by 1, and whenever you would become 
frightened during the duration, reduce the amount by 1. If you 
critically fail a saving throw against a fear Effect during the 
duration, 
veil of confldence 
ends immediately and you increase 
the frightened condition you gain from the critical failure by 1 
instead of decreasing it. 
VENTRILOQUISM
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minuteWhenever you speak, you can make your voice seem to come 
from somewhere else within 30 feet. Any creature that hears the 
sound can attempt to disbelieve your illusion.
Heightened (2nd)
 The spell's duration increases to 1 hour, 
and you can also change the tone, quality, and other aspects 
Attack
Death
Necromancy
Negative
IllusionVisualEnchantmentMentalAuditory
Illusionof your
 voice. A creature must succeed at a Perception check 
against you before it can attempt to disbelieve your illusion.
VIBRANT PATTERN
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting
Range 120 feet; Area
 10-foot burstDuration
 concentration, up to 1 minute
You create a pattern of lights in the air that pulses with intense 
light. Creatures are dazzled while inside the pattern. A creature 
must attempt a Will saving throw if it's inside the pattern when 
you cast it, enters the pattern, ends its turn within the pattern, or 
uses a Seek or Interact action on the pattern. A creature currently 
blinded by the pattern doesn't need to attempt new saving throws.
Success Unaflected. Failure
 The target is blinded by the pattern. If it exits the 
pattern, it gets a new save to recover from the blindness 
at the end of each of its turns, to a maximum duration of 
1 minute. Critical Failure
 The target is blinded for 1 minute. VIGILANT EYE
 POWER 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range sight or 1 footDuration
 10 minutes or more
You create an invisible eye sensor, as if you had cast 
clairvoyance
. When created, this eye must be either in your line of sight or 
within 1 foot of a surface you touch (such as on the other side 
of a door).If you have a pool of Spell Points, when the spell's duration 
ends, you can spend 1 Spell Point as a free action to extend the 
duration for another minute.
VISIONS OF DANGER
 SPELL 
7 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 500 feet; Area
 30-foot burstDuration
 1 minuteAn illusion of horrific otherworldly creatures appears within the 
spell's area. The creatures look like Tiny swarming monsters, 
with a specific appearance of your choice, such as hellish fiies or 
animated saw blades. Any creature that's inside the burst when 
it's created, enters the burst, or ends its turn inside the burst 
must attempt a Will save to avoid taking 8d8 mental damage. A 
creature that tries to Interact with the monsters or observes one 
with a Seek action can attempt to disbelieve the illusion.
Success Half damage. Critical Success No damage, and the target can immediately 
attempt to disbelieve.
Failure
 Full damage. Critical Failure
 Double damage. Heightened (+1) The mental damage increases by 1d8.
VOLCANIC ERUPTION
 SPELL 
7 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Area
 5-foot radius, 80-foot-tall 
cylinderIllusionVisualDivination
Auditory
IllusionVisualEvocation
Fire
269
The ground opens up, spraying a column of lava high into the 
air in a vertical cylinder, dealing 13d6 fire damage. Creatures in 
the area must attempt a Reflex save or take 13d6 fire damage. 
The lava rapidly cools, and creatures in the area might become 
partially encased in rock depending on their Reflex saves. A 
creature encased in rock is sluggish 1, is hampered 5 feet, 
and when fiying treats all normal terrain as difficult terrain. A 
fiying creature immediately descends 20 feet the moment it's 
encased, but doesn't take falling damage from this movement. 
A creature encased in rock can attempt to Break Open or 
Escape against your spell DC to end the Effect. Otherwise, the 
creature remains encased until it takes a total of 50 damage, 
freeing it from the rock.
Success Half damage and not encased. Critical Success No damage and not encased. Failure
 Full damage and encased. Critical Failure
 Double damage and encased. Additionally, creatures in the area that critically succeed at 
their saves and creature that are within 5 feet of the lava column 
automatically takes 2d6 fire damage from the intense heat.
Heightened (+1) The damage dealt in the area increases by 2d6, 
and the damage dealt by the intense heat increases by 1d6.
WAKING NIGHTMARE
 SPELL 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minuteYou fill the creature's mind with a vision out of a nightmare that 
might help or hinder it. Before attempting an attack roll, saving 
throw, or skill check, the target must attempt a DC 11 flat check. 
They gain a conditional bonus or penalty to the attack roll, saving 
throw, or skill check depending on the result.
Success +1 conditional bonus. Critical Success +2 conditional bonus. Failure
 –1 conditional penalty.
Critical Failure
 –2 conditional penalty.
WAIL OF THE BANSHEE
 SPELL 
9 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 40-foot aura; 
Targets
 any number of creatures
Your scream chills the souls of enemies that hear it. 
Each living enemy in the burst takes 5d10 damage and is drained 1d4, depending on its Fortitude save.
Success Full damage and no drain. Critical Success No damage or drain. Failure
 Full damage and drain. Critical Failure
 Double damage and drained 4.WALK ON AIR
 POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting
You Stride, gaining the benefits of the 
air walk
 spell until the end of your turn, after which you fall normally.
WALL OF FIRE
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Divination
MentalAuditory
Death
Necromancy
AirConjuration
Evocation
Fire
Range 120 feetDuration
 1 minuteYou create either a 5-foot-thick, 60-foot-long, 10-foot-high wall 
of flame in a straight line or a 5-foot-thick, 10-foot-radius ring of 
flame. The wall stands vertically in either form; if you wish, the 
wall can be of a shorter length or height. Everything on each 
side of the wall is concealed from creatures on the opposite 
side. Any creature crossing the wall or occupying the wall's 
area at the start of its turn takes 3d6 fire damage.
Heightened (+1) The fire damage increases by 1d6.
WALL OF FORCE
 SPELL 
6 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feetDuration
 1 minuteYou form an invisible wall of pure magical force up to 50 feet 
across and up to 20 feet high. The wall has no discernible 
thickness. If the wall's surface would be broken by any creature 
or object, the spell is lost. The wall has AC 10, TAC 6, and Hardness 
23, and it can take 3 additional Dents before being broken. If the 
wall is broken, the spell ends. The wall blocks physical Effects 
from passing through it, and because it's made of force, it blocks 
incorporeal and ethereal creatures as well. Teleportation Effects 
can pass through the barrier, as can visual Effects (since the wall 
is invisible).Wall of force
 is immune to dispelling Effects of its level or 
lower, but the wall is automatically destroyed by a 
disintegrate
 spell of any level or by contact with a 
sphere of annihilation
 or rod of cancellation
.Heightened (+2) The Hardness of the wall increases by 5.
WALL OF ICE
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feetDuration
 1 minuteYou create either a 1-foot-thick, 60-foot-long, 10-foot-high wall 
of ice in a straight line (the wall doesn't have to be vertical but 
it must be anchored on both sides to a solid surface) or a 1-foot-
thick, 10-foot hemisphere of ice. The ice that makes up the 
wall is opaque. If you wish, the wall can be of a smaller length, 
height, or radius. You must evoke the wall in an unbroken open 
space so its edges don't pass through any creatures or objects, 
or the spell is lost. Each 10-foot-by-10-foot section of the wall has AC 10, TAC 
8, and Hardness 13. Each section is immune to cold and water. 
A section also has weakness to fire 15; a section of the wall 
broken by fire is completely destroyed immediately, melting 
and evaporating into water and steam. A section broken or 
destroyed by means other than fire can be moved through as 
difficult terrain and deals 2d6 cold damage to anyone passing 
through it. 
Heightened (+2) The Hardness of each section of the wall 
increases by 4 and the cold damage for crossing a broken or 
destroyed section increases by 1d6.
Evocation
Force
ColdEvocation
Water
270 WALL OF STONE
 SPELL 
5 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feetYou create a 1-inch-thick, 120-foot-long, and 20-foot-high wall of 
stone. You can shape the wall's path, placing each 5 feet of the 
wall on the border between squares. The wall doesn't need to 
stand vertically, so you can use it to form a bridge or set of stairs, 
for example. You must conjure the wall in an unbroken open 
space so its edges don't pass through any creatures or objects or 
the spell is lost. Each 5-foot-by-5-foot section of the wall has AC 
10, TAC 6, and Hardness 17. A broken section of the wall can be 
moved through, but rubble created from it is difficult terrain.
Heightened (+2) The Hardness of each section of the wall 
increases by 5.
WALL OF THORNS
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 60 feetDuration
 1 minuteYou create a 5-foot-thick, 60-foot-long, and 10-foot-high wall 
of brambles and thorns in a straight line. The wall stands 
vertically. If you wish, the wall can be of a shorter length or 
height. Everything on each side of the wall has cover from 
creatures on the opposite side, and the wall's space counts as 
difficult terrain. For every move action a creature uses that 
enters at least one of the wall's spaces, that creature takes 3d4 
piercing damage.
Each 5-foot-by-5-foot section of the wall has AC 10, TAC 6, 
and Hardness 9. A broken section can be moved through freely.
Heightened (+1) The Hardness of each section of the wall 
increases by 2 and the piercing damage increases by 1d4.
WALL OF WIND
 LEVEL 
3 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feetDuration
 1 minuteYou create a 5-foot-thick, 60-foot-long, and 30-foot-high wall of 
swirling winds within range. The wall stands vertically, but you can 
shape its path. Though the wall of wind distorts the air, creatures 
can see clearly though it and it does not hamper sight. The wall has 
the following Effects.
Physical ranged attacks, such as arrows, bolts, sling bullets, 
and other similarly sized ammunition, can't pass through the 
wall. Attacks from bigger ranged weapons, such as javelins, 
take a –2 circumstance penalty to their attack rolls if their path 
passes through the wall. Massive ranged weapons and spell 
Effects that don't create physical objects pass through the wall 
without trouble.
Creatures attempting to move overland through the wall treat 
it as difficult terrain. Gases, including creatures in gaseous form, 
can't pass through the wall.
A creature that spends a move action to attempt to fiy through 
the wall must attempt a Fortitude save.
Conjuration
EarthConjuration
PlantAirEvocation
Success The fiying creature treats the wall as difficult terrain 
this turn. Critical Success The creature can move through the wall 
without treating it as difficult terrain this turn.
Failure
 The wall stops the movement of the fiying creature, and 
any remaining movement from its current action is wasted.
Critical Failure
 Per failure, and the creature is pushed 10 feet 
away from the wall.
WANDERER'S GUIDE 
 POWER 
2 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Duration 
24 hours
You call upon your deity to guide your route, allowing you 
and allies who travel overland with you to reduce the distance 
reduction from difficult terrain by half for the duration, as long 
as you don't deviate from the divinely inspired route. This doesn't 
have any Effect on movement during encounters. If you use this 
ability again before the duration is over, this Effect ends and is 
replaced by that of the new route.
WARP MIND
 SPELL 
7 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Targets
 one creature
The target's mind is thrown into confusion, 
depending on its Will saving throw. 
Success The target is confused for 1 round.
Critical Success The target is unaflected. Failure
 The target is confused for 1 minute. Critical Failure
 The target is confused permanently.
The Effect of warp mind
 is instantaneous and therefore can't be 
dispelled until it runs its course, though it can be counteracted 
by 
alter reality, miracle, primal phenomenon, restoration, or wish. WARPED TERRAIN
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 60 feet; Area
 5-foot burstDuration
 1 minuteYou create an illusion that makes a surface appear hazardous. 
Any surface in that area (typically the ground) is filled with 
illusory hazards. Any creature moving through the illusion 
treats the squares as difficult terrain. A creature can attempt 
a Seek action to disbelieve the Effect (see page 194). If it 
succeeds, it ignores the Effect for the remaining duration. 
Casting warped terrain
 again ends any previous 
warped terrain
 you created.
Heightened (4th) You can make the 
warped terrain
 appear 
in the air rather than on a surface, causing it to function as 
difficult terrain for fiying creatures.
WATCHING THE WATCHERS
 POWER 
2 Casting 1 minute (Material, Somatic, Verbal); 
Requirements
 You are in a city.
Duration
 1 hourYou tap into the pulse of the city and its wardens, gaining 
knowledge of their movements. You instantly learn the location 
Divination
EmotionEnchantmentMentalIllusionVisual 
DetectionDivination
271of the nearest openly visible city guard activity within the city, 
outside the regular patrols and activities, and the spell ends. 
If the city guard isn't currently engaged in such an activity, the 
spell reports the next one that occurs during the duration and 
the spell ends. WATER BREATHING
 SPELL 
2 Casting 1 minute (Somatic, Verbal)
Range 30 feet; Targets
 up to five creatures
Duration
 1 hourThe targets can breathe underwater.
Heightened (3rd)
 The duration increases to 8 hours.
Heightened (4th) The duration increases to 24 hours.
WATER WALK
 SPELL 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range touch; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 10 minutesThe target can walk on the surface of water and other liquids 
without falling through. It can go underwater if it wishes, but in 
that case it must swim normally and doesn't gain the ability to 
breathe underwater.
Heightened (4th) The spell's range increases to 30 feet, and you 
can target up to 10 creatures.
WEAKENING GROUND
 SPELL 
7 Casting 1 minute (Material,
 Somatic, Verbal)
Cost 1 vial of holy water
Area 
30-foot burst centered on you
Duration
 24 hours
You sanctify the area, sprinkling it with holy water and materials 
anathema to particular foes to render them vulnerable to 
destruction. Choose aberrations, celestials, dragons, fiends, or 
undead. All such creatures in the area reduce their resistances 
by 3 and gain weakness 3 to physical damage.
Heightened (9th) Aflected creatures reduce their resistances by 
4 and gain weakness 4 to physical damage.
WEAPON OF JUDGMENT
 SPELL 
9 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting; 
Requirements
 You have a deity.
Range 100 feet; Targets
 one creature
Duration
 1 minuteAn immense weapon of force appears, hovering in the air above 
the target. The weapon has the ghostly visual appearance of 
your deity's favored weapon. Name war or peace when you cast 
this spell. If you name war, the weapon Strikes the target at the end of 
each of its turns that the target failed to act in a hostile manner 
against a particular creature. You mentally choose one creature 
when you name war, and the target instinctively knows which 
creature it is. This must be a creature both you and the target 
can see. If you name peace, the weapon Strikes the target each time 
the target acts in a hostile manner against you or one of your 
allies. You mentally choose up to five allies when you name 
Transmutation
Transmutation
Abjuration
Consecration
Evocation
Force
peace, and the target instinctively knows who those allies are. 
The weapon Strikes only once per act, even if the act targets 
multiple allies. Attacks with the weapon use your attack modifier with that 
type of weapon, but they substitute your spellcasting ability 
modifier instead of the normal ability score. Regardless of its 
appearance, the weapon deals force damage equal to 3d10 plus 
your spellcasting ability modifier. The weapon takes a multiple 
attack penalty, but has its own rather than using yours.
When you Strike with the weapon, you can deal damage of 
the normal damage type of the weapon instead of force damage 
(or any of the available damage types for a versatile weapon). No 
other attributes of the weapon apply, and even a ranged weapon 
attacks adjacent creatures only. A weapon of judgment counts as 
a weapon for the purposes of triggers, resistances, and so forth.
The weapon doesn't take up space, grant fianking, or have any 
other attributes a creature would. The weapon can't make any 
kind of attack other than a normal Strike, and feats or spells that 
aflect weapons do not apply to this weapon.
Heightened (10th) The force damage increases by 1d10.
WEAPON STORM
 SPELL 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Area
 30-foot cone or 10-foot auraYour Somatic Casting action for this spell is a swing with one 
weapon you're holding that you're trained with, so you can use 
the Somatic Casting action even if you don't have a hand free. 
The weapon magically multiplies into duplicates that swipe at all 
creatures in either a cone or an aura, dealing four dice of damage 
to creatures in the area. This damage has the same type as the 
chosen weapon and uses the same die size. Determine the die 
size as if you were attacking with the weapon; for instance, if 
you were wielding a two-hand weapon in both hands, you'd use 
its two-hand damage die. Each creature in the area must attempt 
a Reflex save.
Success Half damage. Critical Success Unaflected. Failure
 Full damage. Critical Failure
 Double damage, plus the weapon's critical 
specialization Effect.
Heightened (+1) Add another damage die.
WEAPON SURGE 
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting
Your Somatic Casting action for this spell is to hold your weapon 
aloft and charge it with magical energy, so you can use the 
Somatic Casting action even if you don't have a hand free. On 
your next attack with that weapon before the start of your next 
turn, increase the item bonus of your weapon by 1 (minimum +1 
and maximum +5). This adds an additional die of damage as is normal for magic weapons.
WEB SPELL 
2 Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Area
 10-foot burstEvocation
Evocation
Conjuration
272 Duration
 1 minuteYou create a sticky web in the area that impedes creatures' 
movement each time they try to move through it. Squares filled 
with the web are diflcult terrain. Each square can be cleared of 
the web by a single attack or efiect that deals at least 5 slashing 
damage or 1 fire damage. A square has AC 5 and TAC 5, and it 
automatically fails its saving throws.
Each time a creature begins to use a move action while in the 
web, it must attempt an Athletics check against your spell DC to 
avoid being entangled or immobilized. A creature that gets out of 
the web ceases to be entangled by it.
Success The creature is unafiected and clears the web from 
every square it leaves after leaving the square.
Critical Success The creature is unafiected and doesn't need 
to attempt further saving throws against the web this turn. 
It clears the web from every square it leaves after leaving 
the square.
Failure
 The creature is entangled until the start of its next 
turn but doesn't need to attempt further saving throws 
against the web during this action.
Critical Failure
 The creature is immobilized until the start of 
its next turn, after which it is entangled for 1 round.
Heightened (4th)
 The spell's area increases to a 20-foot burst, 
and its range increases to 60 feet.
WEIRD SPELL 
9 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 120 feet; Targets
 any number of creatures
You fill the targets' minds with terrifying images 
of fearsome creatures, each drawn from the 
target's worst fears. Only the targets can see their 
assailants. For each target, the effects of the 
weird
 are based on 
the target's Will saving throw.
Success Unafiected. Failure
 The target takes 16d6 mental damage and is 
frightened 2.Critical Failure
 The target is so afraid, it might instantly die. It must attempt a Fortitude saving throw. On a successful 
Fortitude save, the target still takes the effects of Failure 
above and is ffieeing until the end of its next turn. If if fails, 
it is reduced to 0 Hit Points and dies. 
WHOLENESS OF BODY
 POWER 
2 Casting  Verbal Casting
You heal yourself in one of the following ways, 
chosen by you when you cast the spell.

Ł You regain Hit Points equal to 1d8 plus your spellcasting 
ability modifier.

Ł You attempt to cure one toxin aflicting you; attempt to 
counteract the condition. Heightened (+1) If you choose to regain Hit Points, the Hit Points 
regained increase by 2d8.
WILD CLAWS
 POWER 
1 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minute or until dismissedDeath
EmotionFear
IllusionMentalHealingNecromancy
Positive
MorphTransmutation
Your hands transform into incredibly sharp claws. These claws 
are an unarmed attack you're trained in, dealing 1d6 slashing 
damage (agile, finesse). You can still hold and use items with your 
hands while they're transformed by this spell, but you cannot 
hold an item while attacking.
Heightened (2nd) The claws radiate primal energy. They count as 
a +1 magic weapon, gaining a +1 item bonus on attack rolls and 
dealing another die of damage on a hit. Heightened (4th) The claws count as a 
+2 magic weapon
.Heightened (5th) The claws count as a 
+2 magic weapon
 and leave terrible, ragged wounds that deal 1d6 persistent bleed 
damage on a hit. Heightened (6th) The claws count as a 
+3 magic weapon 
and deal 2d6 persistent bleed damage on a hit. Heightened (8th) The claws count as a 
+4 magic weapon
 and deal 3d6 persistent bleed damage on a hit. WILD WINDS GUST
 POWER 
7 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting; 
Requirements
 You are in wild winds stance.
Area
 30-foot coneMake a wind crash Strike against each creature in the area. 
These attacks all count toward your multiple attack penalty, 
but the penalty doesn't increase until after you make all 
the attacks.
WILD WINDS STANCE
 POWER 
4 Casting  Somatic Casting
Duration
 until you leave the stance
You take on the stance of the ffiowing winds, 
sending out waves of energy to attack at a distance. You can 
make wind crash unarmed Strikes as ranged Strikes against 
targets within 30 feet. These deal 1d4 bludgeoning damage, use 
the brawling group, and have the agile, nonlethal, propulsive, 
and unarmed traits. Wind crash Strikes ignore screening.
While in wild winds stance, you gain a +1 conditional bonus to 
AC against ranged attacks.
WIND JUMP
 POWER 
5 Casting  Verbal Casting
Duration
 1 minuteYou gain a ffiy Speed equal to your Speed. You must end your turn 
on solid ground, or you fall.
Heightened (6th) At the end of your turn, you can attempt a DC 
30 Acrobatics check to find purchase in midair. If you succeed, 
you don't fall.
WIND WALK
 SPELL 
8 Casting 10 minutes (Material, Somatic, Verbal)
Range touch; Targets
 you and up to five creatures 
touchedDuration
 8 hoursWhen you cast this spell, all targets transform into a vaguely 
cloud-like form and are picked up by a wind moving in the 
direction of your choice. You can Concentrate on the Spell to 
change the wind's direction. The wind carries the targets at 
Attack
Evocation
Evocation
OpenStanceTransmutation
AirTransmutation
273a Speed of 20 miles per hour, but if any of the targets make 
an attack, Cast a Spell, come under attack, or otherwise enter 
encounter mode, the spell ends for all targets and they drift 
gently to the ground.
WISH SPELL 
10
Casting  Material Casting, 
 Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
You pronounce a wish, making your greatest desire come true. 
A wish spell can produce any one of the following effects.

Ł Duplicate any arcane spell of 9th level or lower.

Ł Duplicate any non-arcane spell of 7th level or lower.

Ł Produce any efiect whose power level is in line with the 
above effects.
The GM might allow you to try using 
wish to produce greater 
effects than these, but doing so might be dangerous or the spell 
might have only a partial efiect.
WORD OF FREEDOM
 POWER 
2 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Targets
 one creature 
You either remove the grabbed condition from the target or 
suppress one of the following conditions of your choice that's 
afiecting the target for 1 round: confused, entangled, frightened, 
or paralyzed. You can Concentrate on the Spell each round to 
continue to suppress the condition for 1 round, to a maximum 
of 1 minute. If you don't remove the efiect that provided the 
condition, the condition returns after you stop Concentrating 
on the Spell. Divination
EnchantmentMental 
WORD OF TRUTH
 POWER 
1 Casting  Verbal Casting
You speak a statement you believe to be true and that is free of 
any attempt to deceive through twisting words, omission, and 
so on. The statement must be 25 words or fewer. A symbol of 
your deity glows above your head, and anyone who sees you 
and hears your statement knows that you believe it to be true.
ZONE OF TRUTH
 SPELL 
3 Casting  Somatic Casting, 
 Verbal Casting
Range 30 feet; Area
 20-foot burstDuration
 10 minutesCreatures within the area or those entering it have diflculty 
lying, depending on their Will saves. Each potentially afiected 
creature is allowed a save to avoid the effects when the spell 
is cast or when the creature first enters the area. It keeps the 
results of this initial save if it leaves and reenters the area. 
Afiected creatures are aware of this enchantment. Therefore, 
they can avoid answering questions to which they would 
normally respond with a lie, or they might be evasive as long as 
they remain within the boundaries of the truth.
Success The target takes a –1 conditional penalty to 
Deception checks. Critical Success Unafiected. Failure
 The target can't speak any deliberate and intentional 
lies and takes a –1 conditional penalty to Deception checks.
Critical Failure
 The target can't speak any deliberate and 
intentional lies and takes a –4 conditional penalty to Deception checks. Divination
EnchantmentMental 
274 RITUALS
Rituals are lengthy, esoteric, and complicated spells that 
can have both incredible effects and weighty consequences. 
Rarity: Rituals are never common, though chances are 
if you look hard enough, you'll be able to find someone 
who can perform an uncommon ritual for you. However, 
they may not necessarily be willing to teach you its secrets.
Spell Level: Each ritual has an associated minimum spell 
level. A ritual's primary caster must be of a level equal to 
twice the ritual's spell level, though they do not need to be 
a spellcaster. Rituals do not require spell slots to cast. 
Casting: Rituals can be cast by any character who knows 
the ritual, even non-spellcasters, as long as they have high 
enough proficiency in the relevant skill (see Proficiency 
below). Rituals always take at least 8 hours to perform, 
and often longer. Rituals are thus downtime activities, 
though it's possible, albeit risky, to perform them with 
enough uninterrupted time in the field. All rituals require 
Material, Somatic, and Verbal Casting actions throughout 
their casting time. Rituals have their casting time listed in 
days. Each day of casting requires 8 hours of participation 
in the ritual from all casters, with breaks in between for 
multi-day rituals to allow for rest. Any one of the casters 
can maintain the ritual during the breaks. Rituals can be 
heightened to any level up to half the primary caster's level, 
as decided when the ritual is initiated. Cost: The cost entry lists any valuable components or 
foci; if the ritual doesn't have material requirements, it won't 
have a cost entry. Components are consumed when the 
primary caster makes the primary skill check for the ritual. Secondary Casters: Many rituals require additional 
secondary casters; like the primary caster, secondary 
casters do not need to be a member of a spellcasting 
class. A secondary caster entry indicates the minimum 
number of secondary casters, without which the ritual is 
impossible. Often, a ritual requires additional secondary 
skill checks to represent specific facets of the ritual, with 
a high-difficulty skill DC of twice the ritual's spell level. 
Different secondary casters must attempt each secondary 
skill check, and secondary skill checks precede the primary 
skill check. Succeeding at a secondary skill check allows 
the ritual to proceed normally, and critically succeeding 
gives the primary caster a +2 circumstance bonus to the 
primary skill check, failing gives the primary caster a 
–4 circumstance penalty to the primary skill check, and 
critically failing gives the primary caster a –4 circumstance 
penalty to the primary skill check and also reduces the 
degree of success of the primary skill check by one step. Proficiency: Rituals require the primary caster to have a 
certain level of proficiency in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, 
or Religion, depending on the ritual. Almost all rituals 
require at least expert rank in the appropriate skill. Rituals 
always require a primary skill check for the listed skill that 
determines the ritual's outcome. The primary caster must 
always attempt the primary skill check, with a severe-difficulty skill DC of twice the ritual's spell level. Fortune
 and 
misfortune effects don't apply to a ritual's skill checks, nor 
do any conditional bonuses or circumstance bonuses other 
than from a critical success with a secondary skill. The GM can also adjust the DC of rituals or add or 
change the skills to fit specific circumstances. For example, 
a ritual site on a convergence of ley lines might make a 
normally difficult ritual drastically easier to perform on 
the night of a new moon, thus allowing lower-level PCs or 
NPCs to perform the ritual, or make it functioning beyond 
the normal level requirements, but the skill check might 
change to Occultism in order to take advantage of ley lines. Backlash: Some rituals have a backlash: a negative side 
effect that affects all casters, both primary and secondary, 
regardless of whether the ritual succeeds or fails. Effect: A ritual's effect depends on whether it's a critical 
success, a success, a failure, or a critical failure, as determined 
by the primary skill check. CONSECRATE 
 RITUAL 
2 Casting 3 days
Cost Rare incense and ofierings worth a total value 
of 20 gp × the spell level 
Secondary Casters 2, Crafting, Performance; must be of your religion
Proficiency
 expert in Religion
Range 40 feet; Area
 40-foot-radius burst around an immobile altar, 
shrine, or fixture of your deity
Duration
 1 year
You consecrate a site to your deity, chanting her praises and 
creating a sacred space. Worshipers of your deity in the area gain 
a +1 conditional bonus to attack rolls, skill checks, saving throws, 
and Perception checks, and creatures anathema to your deity 
in the area (such as undead for Pharasma or Sarenrae) take a –1 
conditional penalty to those checks. Attacks made by worshipers 
of your deity within the area count as having your deity's alignment 
for the purpose of an enemy's weakness to aligned attacks or 
regeneration deactivated by aligned attacks. 
Success The consecration succeeds.
Critical Success The consecration succeeds and either lasts for 
10 years instead of 1 or covers an area with twice the radius. 
Occasionally, with your deity's favor, this might produce an 
even more amazing efiect, such as a permanent consecrated 
area or an entire cathedral covered in a 
consecrate 
efiect. 
Failure
 The consecration fails.
Critical Failure
 The consecration fails spectacularly and angers 
your deity, who sends a sign of displeasure. You and other 
worshipers of your deity can't attempt to consecrate the 
same site again for at least 1 year.
Heightened (7th): The consecrated area is also dimensionally 
locked, per the spell dimensional lock, but the efiect doesn't 
attempt to dispel extradimensional travel by worshipers of your 
deity. The cost increases to 200 gp × the spell level.
GEAS RITUAL 
3 Casting 1 day
Secondary Casters 1, Society or Lore (law)
Proficiency
 expert in Arcana, Occultism, or Religion
Consecration
Evocation
CurseEnchantmentMental 
275 Range 10 feet; Target
 one creature of a level no greater than twice 
the geas's level plus 1
Duration
 see text
You enforce a magic rule on a willing target, forcing it to either carry 
out or refrain from carrying out a certain act. A 
geas to perform 
an act is usually conditional, such as, "Always ofier hospitality 
to strangers seeking a place to stay." An unconditional 
geas to 
perform a certain act doesn't require the target to perform that 
act exclusively, though it must prioritize the task above all leisure 
pursuits. The most common geas to refrain from carrying out an 
act is a geas to avoid violating a contract, and in those cases, the 
secondary caster usually takes charge of making sure the wording 
of the contract attunes correctly with the magic. Because the 
target is willing, geas can have a duration that lasts for as long as 
the target agrees to. If the target is unable to fulfill the geas, it gains 
sick 1, and the sick condition increases by 1 for each consecutive 
day it is prevented from following the geas, to a maximum of sick 
4. The sick condition ends immediately when it follows the geas 
again; it can't remove the sick condition in any other way. Only 
powerful magic like 
wish can remove a willing 
geas. Success The geas succeeds. Critical Success The geas succeeds and the target receives a 
+1 conditional bonus to skill checks that directly uphold the 
geas (at the GM's discretion). 
Failure
 The geas fails. Critical Failure 
The geas fails, and you are instead afiected by 
the geas you were attempting to place on the target.
Heightened (5th): You can use 
geas on an unwilling creature; it 
receives a Will save to negate the efiect. If you do, the geas lasts up 
to 1 week. 
Remove curse
 can dispel 
geas on an unwilling creature, 
in addition to powerful magic like 
wish. A clever unwilling creature 
can subvert the geas by contriving situations that prevent it from 
complying, but in that case it becomes sick (as described above).
Heightened (7th): Per 5th-level, but the geas lasts for up to 1 year 
on an unwilling creature.
Heightened (9th): Per 5th-level, but the geas lasts for any duration 
(or is even permanent) on an unwilling creature.
ATONE
 RITUAL 
4 Casting 1 day
Cost rare incense and ofierings worth a total value of 10 gp × the 
target's level (minimum 1)
Secondary Casters 1, Religion; must be the target
Proficiency
 expert in Religion
Range 10 feet; Targets
 another creature with the same deity as 
you, with a level no greater than 9
You attempt to help a truly penitent creature atone for its 
misdeeds, typically because it performed actions contrary to your 
deity's alignment or anathema to your deity. If the creature isn't 
truly penitent for its misdeeds, the result is always a critical failure. 
Success The creature receives absolution for its misdeeds, 
allowing it to regain its standing with your deity. It returns to 
its previous alignment (if its alignment shifted), and regains 
any powers it lost. Before the atonement is complete, the 
creature must perform a special quest or other task chosen 
by your deity as befits its misdeeds. If this is something that 
Abjuration
can be completed during downtime, it should take no less 
than 1 month. Critical Success The creature receives absolution per a success, 
and for 1 week, it receives a burst of intuition just before 
performing an act that would be anathema to your deity or 
contrary to your deity's alignment. 
Failure
 The creature does not receive absolution and must 
continue to meditate on its misdeeds and seek to redress 
them. Any future 
atone rituals to atone for the same 
misdeeds cost half Price. Critical Failure
 The creature ofiends your deity and is 
permanently excommunicated. It can never rejoin your 
religion without a more direct intervention. 
Heightened (5th) The target can be up to 11th level, and the cost 
increases to 20 gp × the target's level (minimum 1).
Heightened (6th) The target can be up to 13th level, and the cost 
increases to 40 gp × the target's level (minimum 1).
Heightened (7th) The target can be up to 15th level, and the cost 
increases to 60 gp × the target's level (minimum 1).
Heightened (8th)
 The target can be up to 17th level, and the cost 
increases to 90 gp × the target's level (minimum 1).
Heightened (9th) 
The target can be up to 19th level, and the cost 
increases to 150 gp × the target's level (minimum 1).
Heightened (10th)
 You can help a creature of up to 21st level 
atone, and the cost increases to 200 gp × the target's level 
(minimum 1).PLANAR ALLY
 RITUAL 
5 Casting 1 day
Cost rare incense and ofierings worth a total value of 2 gp × the 
spell level × the target's level (minimum 1)
Secondary Casters 2, Diplomacy; must be of your religion
Proficiency
 expert in Religion
Duration
 see text
You call upon your deity to grant you aid in the form of a divine 
servitor of your deity's choice whose level is at most twice 
planar ally's spell level. While casting the spell, the secondary casters 
entreat your deity, explaining what sort of assistance you need 
and why you need it. If the ritual succeeds, you must ofier the 
servitor payment depending on factors such as the duration and 
danger of the task. Payment always costs at least as much as 
a consumable item of the creature's level, even for a short and 
simple task, and it often costs as much as a permanent magic item of the creature's level to have a creature fight alongside 
you. If you use the ritual without good reason, the result is 
automatically a critical failure. 
Success Your deity sends a servitor.
Critical Success Your deity sends a servitor, and the servitor's 
payment costs only half as much as normal. If you ask for a 
particular servitor by name, your deity is likely to send that 
servitor unless the servitor is busy. 
Failure
 Your deity does not send a servitor.
Critical Failure
 Your deity is ofiended and sends a sign of 
displeasure or possibly even a servitor to scold or attack 
you, depending on your deity's nature. You also need 
to atone. Conjuration
276 RESURRECT 
 RITUAL 
5 Casting 1 day
Cost diamonds worth a total value of 75 gp × the 
target's level (minimum 1)
Secondary Casters 2, Medicine, SocietyProficiency
 expert in Religion
Range 10 feet; Targets
 one dead creature of a level no greater 
than 11 You attempt to call forth the dead creature's soul back to its body. 
This requires the creature's body to be present and relatively intact. 
The creature must have died within the past year. If Pharasma has 
decided that the creature's time has come, or it doesn't wish to 
return, this ritual automatically fails, but you discover this after the 
first successful Religion check and can end without paying the cost.
Success You resurrect the creature. They lose the dead condition 
and return to life at 1 Hit Point with no spells prepared or 
points in any pools, and still sufiering from any long-term 
debilitations of the old body. Their time in the Boneyard has 
left the character temporarily debilitated, sufiering from 
enervated 2 for 1 week; this condition can't be removed 
or reduced by any means until the week has passed. The 
creature is also permanently changed in some way by the 
time in the afterlife, such as a slight personality shift, a 
streak of white in the hair, or a strange new birthmark.
Critical Success You resurrect the creature. They lose the dead 
condition and return to life at full Hit Points with the same 
spells prepared and points in their pools they had when they 
died, and still sufiering from any long-term debilitations of 
the old body. The creature meets an agent of their deity 
during the resurrection who inspires them, granting them 
a +1 conditional bonus to attack rolls, Perception, saving 
throws, and skill checks for 1 week. The creature is also 
permanently changed in some way by the time in the 
afterlife, such as a slight personality shift, a streak of white 
in the hair, or a strange new birthmark.
Failure
 Your attempt is unsuccessful.
Critical Failure
 Something goes horribly wrong, allowing an 
evil spirit to possess the body, transforming the body into a 
special kind of undead, or some worse fate. 
Heightened (6th): Per 5th level, on a target up to 13th level, and 
the cost increases to 125 gp × the target's level (minimum 1).
Heightened (7th): You can use 
resurrection
 even if you have only 
a small portion of the dead creature's body; the ritual creates a 
new body on a success or critical success. The creature must 
have died within the past decade rather than the past year, and 
the enervated condition on a success is enervated 1 instead of 
enervated 2. This version of resurrection requires four secondary 
casters, each of whom must be at least half the level of the target. 
You can revive a creature of up to 15th level, and the cost increases 
to 200 gp × the target's level (minimum 1).
Heightened (8th): Per 7th level, on a target up to 17th level, and the 
cost increases to 300 gp × the target's level (minimum 1).
Heightened (9th): You can use 
resurrection
 even if you have none 
of the dead creature's body as long as you know the creature's 
name and have touched the creature or a portion of its corpse at 
any point in time. The creature must have died within the past 
HealingNecromancy
century, rather than the past year, and there is no enervated 
condition on a success. This version of resurrection requires eight 
secondary casters, each of whom must be at least half the level of 
the target. You can revive a creature of up to 19th level, and the 
cost increases to 600 gp × the target's level (minimum 1).
Heightened (10th): You can use 
resurrection
 even with none of the 
creature's body as long as you know its name and have touched the 
creature or a portion of its corpse at any point in time. It doesn't 
matter how long ago the creature died, and there is no enervated 
condition on a success. This version of resurrection requires 16 
secondary casters, each of whom must be at least half the level 
of the target. You can revive a creature of up to 21st level, and the 
cost increases to 1,000 gp × the target's level (minimum 1).
COMMUNE RITUAL 
6 Casting 1 day
Cost rare incense worth a total value of 150 gp 
Secondary Casters 1, Occultism or Religion (whichever is primary)
Proficiency
 master in Occultism or Religion
Duration
 up to 10 minutesYou call upon an unknown entity from another plane (always a 
servitor of your deity if you have a patron deity and are using 
Religion) to answer your questions. You can ask the entity up to 
seven questions that could be answered by a yes or no answer. 
The entity is likely to know the answer to questions related to its 
portfolio; for example, a servitor of Gozreh would likely know about 
the unnatural weather patterns in the area and a servitor of Desna 
would likely know about the journey route a notorious snake-oil 
merchant is taking. The entity answers your questions with one 
word answers such as "Yes," "No," "Likely," and "Unknown," though 
its answers always reffect its own agenda and could be deceptive.
Success You can ask your questions and receive answers. 
Critical Success You contact a more powerful entity aligned 
strongly with your interests, possibly your deity herself. The 
entity won't attempt to deceive you, though it still might not 
know the answers to your questions. When important to 
provide clarity, the entity will give answers up to five words, 
such as "If you leave immediately" or "That used to be true."
Failure
 You fail to contact the planar entity.
Critical Failure
 Your attempt exposes your mind to the raw 
enormity of the cosmos, making you stupefied 4 for 1 week.
COMMUNE WITH NATURE
 RITUAL 
6 Casting 1 day
Cost rare incense worth a total value of 60 gp 
Secondary Casters 1, Nature 
Proficiency
 master in Nature
Duration
 up to 10 minutesAs commune, except you contact the primal spirits of nature, which 
know only about animals, beasts, fey, plants, topography, and 
natural resources in a 3-mile radius from the location of the
 ritual. PLANAR BINDING
 RITUAL 
6 Casting 1 day
Cost pentagram ingredients worth a total value of 
2 gp × the spell level × the target's level (minimum 1)
Divination
Mental 
Divination
Prediction
Divination
Prediction
Divination
Mental 
Divination
Prediction
Divination
Prediction
Abjuration
Conjuration 
277 Secondary Casters 4; Crafting; Diplomacy or Intimidation; Arcana 
or Occultism (whichever isn't primary)
Proficiency
 master in Arcana or Occultism
Range interplanar; Targets
 one extraplanar creature
Duration
 see text
You call forth an extraplanar creature whose level is at most 
twice that of 
planar binding and attempt to bargain with it. 
The secondary caster attempting the Crafting check creates a 
warding pentagram to prevent the extraplanar creature from 
attacking or leaving during the bargain; if that caster fails or 
critically fails, then in addition to the usual effects for a failed or critically failed secondary skill check, the extraplanar creature 
can attack or leave instead of negotiate if it wishes. You can also 
leave out this step, removing the need for a Crafting check, with 
the same result (if you're summoning a good outsider you trust, 
for example). The creature can also attack or leave if you attack 
it in any way or if the warding pentagram breaks. Once the 
pentagram is complete, you stand at the tip of the pentagram, 
and the secondary casters stand at each of the other four points.
You conjure the extraplanar creature within your wards and 
you negotiate a deal with it, generally to perform a task for you in 
exchange for payment. A creature that doesn't wish to negotiate at 
all can attempt a Will save to stay on its home plane. Most good and 
neutral extraplanar creatures feel that they have something better 
to do than cater to the whims of mortals and require a significant 
gift, especially if your task presents risks. Evil extraplanar creatures 
are more likely to accept a bargain for a lower Price as long as it 
allows them to wreak havoc on the Material Plane or insinuate their 
evil into the world along the way. Monetary prices usually range 
from the cost of a consumable item of the creature's level for a short 
and simple task, to a permanent magic item of the creature's level or 
more to have a creature fight alongside you. However, extraplanar 
creatures sometimes want payments other than money, such as a 
geas on you to fulfill an unspecified later favor or an infernal contract 
for your soul. If you can't come to an agreement in a reasonable 
length of time after you've made your case, the extraplanar creature 
can return from whence it came at any time. 
Success You call the extraplanar creature.
Critical Success You call the extraplanar creature and bind it 
in the wards for a full day if it refuses to bargain with you 
before it returns home, potentially allowing you to negotiate 
a better deal by threatening to leave it in the wards for a day. 
Failure
 You fail to call the extraplanar creature.
Critical Failure
 You call something dark and horrible, unbound 
by your wards, and it immediately attempts to destroy you.
PRIMAL CALL
 RITUAL 
6 Casting 1 day
Cost faerie circle ingredients worth a total value of 
1 gp × the spell level × the target's level (minimum 1)
Secondary Casters 4, Crafting, Diplomacy, Survival
Proficiency
 master in Nature
Range 100 miles; Targets
 one animal, beast, fey, fungus, or plant
Duration
 see text
This ritual works like 
planar ally except you craft a faerie circle and 
call an animal, beast, fey, fungus, or plant from within 100 miles.
Abjuration
Conjuration 
LEGEND LORE
 RITUAL 
7 Casting 1 day
Cost rare incense worth a total value of 300 gp 
Secondary Casters 3, Performance, Society
Proficiency
 master in OccultismYou attempt to learn useful legends about a particular subject, 
which must be an important person, place, or thing. If the subject 
is present, increase the degree of success of your primary skill 
check by one step. If you have only vague information about 
the subject before attempting the ritual, decrease the degree 
of success of your primary skill check by one step. These 
modifiers cancel out if you have a subject present with little to 
no baseline information.
Success You recite mysterious legends, tales, and lore about 
the subject over the course of an hour after the ritual ends. 
These provide useful information for further inquiry but are 
generally incomplete or enigmatic. As is the nature of legends, 
you are likely to learn multiple contradictory versions.
Critical Success Per success except that the information is 
more complete and less mysterious, often emphasizing 
more accurate or useful legends over those exaggerated 
over time.
Failure
 You fail to learn any useful legends.
Critical Failure
 Your mind is lost in the past, causing you to be 
unable to react to the present for 1 week except to perform 
necessities like breathing and sleeping.
CONTROL WEATHER
 RITUAL 
8 Casting 1 day
Secondary Casters 2, Survival
Proficiency
 master in Nature
Area
 2-mile-radius circle centered on you
Duration
 4d12 hoursYou alter the current weather in the area, making it calm and 
normal for the season or choosing up to two weather effects 
from the following list, as appropriate to the current season.

Ł Spring Drizzle, heat, hurricane, sleet, thunderstorm, tornado

Ł Summer Drizzle, extreme heat, hailstorm, heat, torrential rain

Ł Autumn
 Cold weather, fog, mild heat, sleet

Ł Winter Blizzard, mild cold, extreme cold, thaw
You can't specifically control the manifestations, such as the 
exact path of a tornado or the targets of lightning strikes.
Success You change the weather as you desired.
Critical Success You change the weather as you desired and 
you can choose to have it afiect a larger area (up to a 
5-mile-radius circle), or have a longer duration (any number 
of additional d12 hours, up to 16d12 hours). Failure
 You fail to change the weather as you desired.
Critical Failure
 The weather changes in an unanticipated way, 
determined by the GM but generally as contradictory to 
your wishes as possible (for instance, a terrible storm when 
you were attempting to call good weather).
Heightened (9th) You can create unseasonable weather and 
contradictory weather effects, such as extreme cold and a 
hurricane. You can make the weather calm and normal for a 
different season or choose weather effects from any of the lists.
Divination
Evocation
278 After you've created your character but before you've begun playing the game, you may 
need more detailed information to get a full picture of how your character works. Perhaps 
you want to know more details about the deity your character worships, or rules for 
your character's animal companion or familiar. Additionally, as you level up, you'll need 
to know how to advance your character and whether you'd like to further specialize her 
mechanical build using options such as archetypes.
Some rules and character options are shared by more than 
one class in the game. Often these are concepts that fit 
with the theme of multiple classes or are universal to the 
world, open to all who have the time and dedication to 
pursue them. This chapter provides details and rules for these game 
options. Some of these rules can be chosen freely by any 
character that qualifies, while others are only accessed 
through a class feature or feat. There are also some that 
require you to be 2nd level or higher before they can be 
chosen, such as archetypes. 
This chapter includes the following sections:
Ł Leveling Up
 below gives you a simple checklist of things to 
do every time your character advances in level.

Ł Archetypes
 on page 279 are ways to customize your 
character to a specific theme by selecting from a list of 
special feats in place of your ordinary class feats.

Ł Animal Companions and Familiars
 on page 284 provides 
rules to create an animal that joins you on your adventures 
and fights by your side. You must have a class feature or 
feat that grants you a companion or familiar.

Ł Deities on page 288 details the major gods of Golarion. 
Even if your character is not a devout worshiper, like a 
cleric or paladin, you should pick a deity to venerate.
LEVELING UPThe world of Pathfinder is a dangerous place, and your 
character will face terrifying beasts and deadly traps on 
her journey into legend. With each challenge resolved, 
she will earn Experience Points (XP) that allow her to 
increase in level. Each level gained grants her greater 
skill, increased resiliency, and new capabilities, allowing 
her to face even greater challenges and go on to earn 
even greater rewards. Each time your character reaches 1,000 Experience 
Points (see page 339), she advances by 1 level. On your 
character sheet, indicate her new level beside the name 
of her class, and deduct 1,000 XP from her XP total. If 
you have any Experience Points left after this, record 
them—they count toward your next level, so your 
character is already on her way to advancing yet again!Next, return to your character's class entry in 
Chapter
 3. You gain the number of Hit Points indicated 
for your class. Now take a look at the class advancement 
table. The table tells you which new abilities you gain 
from your new level in your class, and it reminds you 
which abilities or feats you gain as part of leveling up. 
For example, at 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, 
you gain four ability boosts, which are further explained 
in each class entry.
For instance, if your character has just reached 
2nd level, she most likely gains a class feat and a skill 
feat. You can find any class features and feats you gain 
right in your class entry, though you can also use your 
class feats to take an archetype (see page 279). Your 
character's class entry also explains how to apply any 
ability boosts or skill increases you gain. If you gain 
an ancestry feat, head back to your ancestry's entry 
in Chapter 2 and select another ancestry feat from the 
list of options. If you gain a general feat or a skill feat, 
you can choose from the feats listed in Chapter 5. If 
you gain spells, you can select them from those listed in 
Chapter 7.Once you've made all your choices for your character's 
new level, be sure to go over your character sheet and 
adjust any values that have changed. Remember, at a 
bare minimum, your proficiency modifiers increase by 1 
because you've gained a level, so your AC, attack rolls, 
Perception, saving throws, skill checks, spell rolls, and 
the like all increase by at least 1.To sum up, every time you gain a level, make sure you 
do each of the following:
Ł Increase Hit Points
 as detailed in your class description.

Ł Add Class Features
 from your class advancement table, 
including ability boosts and skill increases. 

Ł Select Feats
 from the appropriate list, as indicated on your 
class advancement table. For ancestry feats, see Chapter 
2. For general and skill feats, see Chapter 5.

Ł Learn Spells
 if your class grants any additional spells.

Ł Adjust Proficiency
 as shown on your class advancement 
table, making sure to account for any skill increases. 
Adjust all of your proficiency values due to your new 
level (usually just increasing each by 1, unless the 
proficiency
 changed).ADVANCEMENT AND OPTIONS
279
There are an infinite number of possible character concepts, 
but you might find that the class feats and skill choices 
aren't sufficient to fully realize your character. Archetypes 
allow you to expand the scope of your character's class. 
Applying an archetype requires you to spend your class 
feats on archetype feats instead of class feats. Start by 
finding the archetype that best fits your character concept, 
and select the archetype's dedication feat using one of 
your class feat choices. Once you have the dedication feat, 
you can select any feat from that archetype in place of a 
class feat as long as you meet its prerequisites. 
Each archetype's dedication feat represents a certain 
portion of your character's focus, so once you select an 
archetype dedication feat, you can't gain another until 
you have satisfied the dedication feat's requirements, 
which you typically do by gaining a certain number of feats from the archetype's list. You cannot retrain a 
dedication feat as long as you have any other feats from that archetype. Included in these archetypes are two special kinds, 
designated by the multiclass and prestige traits. MULTICLASS ARCHETYPES
Archetypes with the multiclass trait represent diversifying 
your training into another class's specialties. You can't 
select a multiclass archetype's dedication feat if you are 
a member of the class of the same name (for instance, a 
fighter can't select the Fighter Dedication feat).
PRESTIGE ARCHETYPESArchetypes with the prestige trait represent the pinnacle 
of power and ability in a narrow field of expertise. 
These frequently have extensive prerequisites and are 
distinguished by the prestige trait. You can never have 
more than one prestige archetype dedication feat. Prestige 
archetypes typically require an event to have happened in 
the story before you can access them. 
SAMPLE ARCHETYPESThe Pathfinder Playtest Rulebook contains the following 
archetypes for you to use in your game: 

Ł Cavalier 
makes you into a mounted knight.

Ł Cleric (Multiclass) allows you to become an ordained priest, 
granting divine boons and spells.
Ł Fighter (Multiclass) trains you in the use of arms and armor.

Ł Gray Maiden (Prestige)
 is a special order of all female 
warriors. Some fight to liberate the tormented, while others 
draw strength from pain. 

Ł Pirate
 grants familiarity with the weapons of the sea and 
makes you adept at fighting while on a boat.

Ł Rogue (Multiclass)
 makes you better at sneaking, stealing, 
and striking from the shadows.

Ł Wizard (Multiclass) 
allows you to dabble in arcane magic.
CAVALIER
You're a mounted knight, ready to stand against any foe 
with your trusty steed. How you fight from your mount 
can vary, from striking with a lance to casting spells.
CAVALIER DEDICATION FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 trained in Nature 
You are a cavalier in service to a knightly order. 
You must follow that order's edicts, or you lose access to Cavalier 
Dedication and all other feats in this archetype. Determine the 
specifics of your order's edicts with your GM.
You gain the service of a trained mount, which is treated as 
a young animal companion (see page 284). Normally, you can 
choose only an animal companion with the mount special ability, 
such as a horse. The GM might allow you to select another type 
of animal companion appropriate to your ancestry and culture, 
but that animal companion doesn't gain the mount special ability.
Special You cannot select another dedication feat until you 
have gained two other feats from the cavalier archetype.
CAVALIER'S BANNER FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Cavalier Dedication
You fly a banner of your knightly coat of arms on your mount's 
back, boosting your allies' morale. You and all allies within 30 
feet of the banner who can see the banner gain a +1 circumstance 
bonus to saves against fear effects. When allies with the frightened 
condition end their turn within 10 feet of the banner and can see 
the banner, they reduce their frightened condition by 2 instead of 
1. If the banner is destroyed, allies who witness its destruction lose 
all benefits and take a –1 circumstance penalty to saves against 
fear for 1 minute. CHALLENGE FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Cavalier Dedication 
Select one foe that you can see and proclaim a 
challenge. Until the start of your next turn, you add a conditional 
bonus to damage rolls with your weapon or unarmed Strikes 
against that foe, and you take a –1 circumstance penalty to AC 
against all foes but the target of your challenge. The damage 
bonus is equal to the number of damage dice your weapon or 
unarmed attack deals. 
If no ally attacks the target of your challenge or otherwise assists 
you in any way before the start of your turn, the challenge lasts until 
the end of your turn instead of expiring at the start of your turn.
KNIGHTLY STEED FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 Cavalier Dedication 
The mount you gained through Cavalier Dedication is now 
treated as a full-grown animal companion.
IMPRESSIVE STEED FEAT 10

Prerequisites
 Knightly Steed The mount you gained through Cavalier Dedication is now a 
savage or nimble animal companion. During an encounter, even 
if you don't use the Command an Animal action, your mount can 
still take 1 action that round on your turn to Stride or Strike.
 Archetype
Dedication
Archetype
Archetype
OpenArchetype
Archetype
ARCHETYPES280 INCREDIBLE STEED FEAT 16

Prerequisites
 Impressive Steed
The mount you gained through Cavalier Dedication is now a 
specialized animal companion, taking a specialization of your 
choice from the options beginning on page 286.
CLERICYou are an ordained priest of your deity and have even 
learned how to cast a few divine spells. Even though 
your main training lies elsewhere, your religious calling 
provides you divine gifts. 
CLERIC DEDICATION FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 Wisdom 16, trained in Religion
You cast spells like a cleric. You gain access to 
the Cast a Spell activity and the Material Casting, 
Somatic Casting, and Verbal Casting actions. You can prepare two 
cantrips each day from the divine spell list or any other cantrips 
you learn or discover. You're trained in spell rolls and spell DCs 
for casting divine spells and in attacks you make with divine 
spells. Your key spellcasting ability for these spells is Wisdom. 
You can use wands, scrolls, and staves, but only for spells of a 
spell level that you can cast. Religion is a signature skill for you.
Choose a deity as you would if you were a cleric. You're bound 
by that deity's anathema.
Special You cannot select another dedication feat until you 
have gained two other feats from the cleric archetype.
BASIC CLERIC SPELLCASTING FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Cleric Dedication
You gain a level 1 spell slot that you can use to prepare a level
 1 cleric spell. At 6th level, you gain a level 2 spell slot that you can 
use to prepare a level 2 cleric spell. At 8th level, you gain a level 3 
spell slot that you can use to prepare a level 3 cleric spell.
Even though you can cast spells, the spell level of your cleric 
cantrips and domain is powers half your level rounded up.
BASIC DOGMA FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Cleric Dedication
Gain a level 1 or level 2 cleric feat.
 DOMAIN FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Cleric Dedication
Select one of your deity's domains. You gain the initial domain 
power tied to your domain and a pool of Spell Points equal to 
your Wisdom modifier that you can use to cast that power.
If you already have a pool of Spell Points, you use the higher 
ability score to determine the pool as normal, and your Spell 
Point pool increases by 1.
ADVANCED DOGMA FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 Basic DogmaGain one cleric feat. For the purposes of meeting its prerequisites, 
your cleric level is equal to your actual level.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time you 
select it, you can gain a new cleric feat.
Archetype
Archetype
Dedication
MulticlassArchetype
Archetype
Archetype
Archetype
Archetype
DIVINE BREADTH FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Basic Cleric SpellcastingYou can cast more divine spells each day. Increase the spell slots 
you gain from cleric archetype feats by 1 for each spell level 
other than your two highest spell levels.
EXPERT CLERIC SPELLCASTING FEAT 12

Prerequisites
 Basic Cleric Spellcasting, master in Religion
You gain a level 4 spell slot that you can use to prepare a level 4 
cleric spell. You become an expert in spell rolls and spell DCs for 
casting divine spells and in attacks you make with divine spells.
At 14th level, you gain a level 5 spell slot that you can use to 
prepare a level 5 cleric spell. At 16th level, you gain a level 6 spell 
slot that you can use to prepare a level 6 cleric spell.
MASTER CLERIC SPELLCASTING FEAT 18

Prerequisites
 Expert Cleric Spellcasting, legendary in Religion
You gain a level 7 spell slot that you can use to prepare a level 7 
cleric spell. You become a master in spell rolls and spell DCs for 
casting divine spells and in attacks you make with divine spells.
At 20th level, you gain a level 8 spell slot that you can use to 
prepare a level 8 cleric spell.
FIGHTERYou have spent time learning the art of warfare, increasing 
your skill at martial arms and at wearing armor. With 
further training, you can become a true combat specialist. FIGHTER DEDICATION FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 Strength or Dexterity 16, trained 
in Athletics
You become trained in light armor, medium armor, 
heavy armor, simple weapons, and martial weapons. Athletics is 
a signature skill for you.
Special You cannot select another dedication feat until you have 
gained two other feats from the fighter archetype.
BASIC MANEUVER FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Fighter Dedication
Gain a level 1 or level 2 fighter feat.
FIGHTER RESILIENCY FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Fighter Dedication, class granting 
8 or fewer Hit Points per level
You gain 3 additional Hit Points for every feat you have from the 
fighter archetype. As you continue selecting fighter archetype 
feats, the additional Hit Points also increase.
 ADVANCED MANEUVER FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 Basic Maneuver
Gain one fighter feat. For the purposes of meeting its 
prerequisites, your fighter level is equal to half your level.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time you 
select it, you can gain a new fighter feat.
Archetype
Archetype
Archetype
Archetype
Dedication
MulticlassArchetype
Archetype
Archetype
Archetype
281 OPPORTUNIST FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 Fighter Dedication
You gain the Attack of Opportunity reaction (see page 87).
WEAPON EXPERT FEAT 12

Prerequisites
 Fighter Dedication
Choose one fighter weapon group. You become an expert with all 
simple and martial weapons that belong to that group.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time you 
select it, you choose a new group.
GRAY MAIDEN
The Gray Maidens are an all-female order of warriors, 
survivors of brainwashing and torture, who were liberated 
when their queen and tormentor fell at the hands of 
adventurers. Some sought to protect others from such 
torment, calling themselves the Scarlet Rose; others flocked 
to the banner of diabolical Cheliax, calling themselves the 
Erinyes Company. You're a member of this elite order, 
whether you're a seasoned veteran or a new recruit. GRAY MAIDEN DEDICATION FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 Strength 16, expert in Fortitude 
saves, trained in heavy armor and all martial 
weapons, member of the Gray Maidens
Your Gray Maiden training has steeled you against harsh physical 
conditions. You become a master at Fortitude saves. When you 
Archetype
Archetype
Archetype
Dedication
Prestige
succeed at a Fortitude save, treat it as a critical success. You also 
gain access to special armor: Gray Maiden plate. Gray Maiden 
plate is a level 3 item that costs 600 sp, grants +7 AC and +3 
TAC, and has a Dexterity modifier cap of +0; otherwise, it uses 
the same stats as full plate.
Special You cannot select another dedication feat until you have 
gained two other feats from the Gray Maiden archetype.
MAIDEN ARMOR EXPERTISE FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Gray Maiden Dedication
You become an expert with shields and Gray Maiden plate.
SCARS FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Gray Maiden Dedication
The scars from your initiation make your body tough. You gain 
resistance to slashing equal to your Constitution modifier.
UNBREAKABLE FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Gray Maiden Dedication
You can endure a staggering amount of punishment. Increase 
your maximum HP by your level, increasing as you gain additional 
levels. You die at dying 5, or dying 6 if you also have Diehard.
ERINYES BLOOD FEAT 10

Prerequisites
 Gray Maiden Dedication, member of 
the Erinyes Company
Like an erinyes devil, you relish the sight of your own 
Archetype
Archetype
Archetype
Archetype
EmotionMental282blood, drawing strength from terrible wounds. While you're taking 
persistent bleed damage, you gain a +2 conditional bonus to damage 
rolls and become accelerated 10. Whenever you take slashing or 
piercing damage, as a free action you can also take persistent bleed 
damage equal to the number of damage dice you took.
 SCARLET ROSE DEVOTION FEAT 10

Prerequisites
 Gray Maiden Dedication, member of 
the Scarlet Rose
You inspire an ally to shake ofi a negative efiect. 
The ally attempts a new save against each efiect it's under that 
allows an additional save each round to remove or diminish the 
efiect. The ally is then bolstered to your Scarlet Rose Devotion.
MAIDEN ARMOR MASTERY FEAT 14

Prerequisites
 Gray Maiden Dedication, expert with 
shields and Gray Maiden plate
You become a master with shields and Gray Maiden plate. Reduce 
your Speed penalty for Gray Maiden plate from 10 feet to 5 feet.
MAIDEN ARMOR LEGEND FEAT 18

Prerequisites
 Gray Maiden Dedication, master 
with shields and Gray Maiden plate
You become legendary with shields and Gray Maiden plate. 
Reduce your check penalties from shields and Gray Maiden plate 
by 1.
PIRATE 
You have sailed the seas, plundering hapless merchant 
ships and fighting against royal navies, all for the lust 
of gold and the call of the open ocean. As your ability 
grows, you become one with your sailing vessel, moving 
effortlessly across deck and boarding other ships, and you 
learn tricks in combat that make you both a canny fighter 
and more successful thief. PIRATE DEDICATION FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 Dexterity 12, trained in Acrobatics 
and Sailing Lore 
When you Balance aboard a ship, treat a success as a critical 
success. You also ignore any difficult terrain, uneven ground, or 
incline caused by the ship's movement. You are trained with the 
hatchet, scimitar, and spear. In addition, Acrobatics is a signature 
skill for you.
Special You cannot select another dedication feat until you have 
gained two other feats from the pirate archetype. 
 HEAVE HO FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Pirate Dedication
You can time your attack with the motion of the boat to knock an 
opponent ofi-balance. Make a melee weapon Strike against a foe 
that is aboard a boat, using the following enhancement. 
Enhancement Your foe must attempt an Acrobatics check to 
Balance against your class DC. On a failure, the foe is knocked 
prone. If its result is a critical failure, the foe is pushed 10 feet 
away and knocked prone.
Archetype
EmotionMentalArchetype
Archetype
Archetype
Dedication
Archetype
ROPE RUNNER FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Pirate Dedication
Whenever you succeed at an Athletics check to Climb using a 
rope or an Acrobatics check to Balance on a rope, treat your 
result as a critical success. You are not flat-footed while Climbing 
with a rope or Balancing on a rope.
SEA LEGS FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Pirate Dedication, trained in Athletics
Athletics is a signature skill for you. Whenever you succeed at 
an Athletics check to Swim, treat your result as a critical success. 
Additionally, you can always hold your breath for a number of 
actions equal to double your Constitution score when in water 
(this is not increased by using the Breathe Deep action).
 BOARDING ACTION FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 Rope Runner
Swing on a rope or Stride up to twice your Speed. As long as 
you either boarded or disembarked a boat during this movement, 
make a Strike and deal an extra damage die if it hits.
 PLUNDER FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 Rope Runner
You know the most important part of any battle is getting the 
loot you came for. Make a melee weapon Strike. If you hit, you 
can immediately attempt to Steal an Object from your target, 
even if the target is in combat.
 ROLL WITH THE SHIP FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Sea Legs
Requirement
 You are aboard a ship that you or 
your allies own.
Trigger
 You attempt a Reflex saving throw against an efiect.
Roll the Reflex save twice and take the better result.
ROGUE
You have practiced sneaking, stealing, and disabling traps. 
With a little time and luck, you'll become a skilled rogue, 
capable of moving through the shadows, striking unseen, 
and escaping without notice. ROGUE DEDICATION FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 Dexterity 16, trained in Thievery
You gain a skill feat and the rogue's surprise attack 
class talent (see page 119). In addition, Thievery is 
a signature skill for you.
Special You cannot gain another dedication feat until you have 
gained two other feats from the rogue archetype.
BASIC TRICKERY FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Rogue Dedication
Gain a level 1 or level 2 rogue feat.
SNEAK ATTACKER FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Rogue Dedication
You gain sneak attack 1d4 (see page 119), which increases to 
Archetype
Archetype
Archetype
Archetype
Archetype
Fortune
Archetype
Dedication
MulticlassArchetype
Archetype
2831d6 at 6th level. You don't increase the number of dice as you 
gain levels.
ADVANCED TRICKERY FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 Basic Trickery
Gain one rogue feat. For the purposes of meeting its prerequisites, 
your rogue level is equal to half your level.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time you 
select it, you gain a new rogue feat.
SKILL MASTERY FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Rogue Dedication
Choose one rogue signature skill in which your proficiency 
rank is expert. That skill becomes a signature skill for you, 
your proficiency rank in that skill increases to master, and 
you gain a skill feat that requires you to be trained or better 
in that skill. 
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time you 
select it, choose a different rogue signature skill.
EVASIVENESS FEAT 12

Prerequisites
 Rogue Dedication, expert in Reflex
Your proficiency rank in Reflex saves increases to master. When 
you succeed at a Reflex save, treat it as a critical success.
WIZARDYou have dabbled in the arcane arts and learned how to 
cast a few spells. Given enough time and practice, you are 
confident that you might become an accomplished mage, 
learning how to cast mighty spells and unlocking ancient 
secrets of arcane lore. 
WIZARD DEDICATION FEAT 2
 Prerequisites
 Intelligence 16, trained in Arcana
You cast spells like a wizard and gain a spellbook 
containing four arcane cantrips of your choice. You 
gain access to the Cast a Spell activity and the Material Casting, 
Somatic Casting, and Verbal Casting actions. You can prepare 
two cantrips each day from those found in your spellbook. You're 
trained in spell rolls and spell DCs for casting arcane spells and 
in attacks you make with arcane spells. Your key spellcasting 
ability for these spells is Intelligence. You can use wands, scrolls, 
and staves, but only for spells of a spell level you can cast. 
Arcana is a signature skill for you.
Special You cannot select another dedication feat until you have 
gained two other feats from the wizard archetype.
ARCANE SCHOOL FEAT 4
 Prerequisite
 Wizard Dedication
Select one school of magic from those found in the wizard class 
(see pages 137–138). You gain the level 1 school power tied to 
your school and a pool of Spell Points equal to your Intelligence 
modifier that you can use to cast that power.
If you already have a pool of Spell Points, use the higher 
ability score to determine the pool, as normal, and your Spell 
Point pool increases by 1.
Archetype
Archetype
Archetype
Archetype
Dedication
MulticlassArchetype
BASIC ARCANA FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Wizard Dedication
Gain a level 1 or level 2 wizard feat of your choice.
BASIC WIZARD SPELLCASTING FEAT 4
 Prerequisites
 Wizard Dedication
Add two level 1 spells to your spellbook. You gain a single level
 1 spell slot that you can use to prepare a level 1 spell from your 
spellbook. At 6th level, add two level 2 spells to your spellbook, 
and you gain a level 2 spell slot that you can use to prepare a 
level 2 spell from your spellbook. At 8th level, add two level 3 
spells to your spellbook, and you gain a level 3 spell slot that you 
can use to prepare a level 3 spell from your spellbook.
Even though you can cast spells, the spell level of your 
cantrips and arcane powers is half your level rounded up.
ADVANCED ARCANA FEAT 6
 Prerequisites
 Basic Arcana
Gain one wizard feat. For the purposes of meeting its 
prerequisites, your wizard level is equal to half your level.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time you 
select it, you gain a new wizard feat.
ARCANE BREADTH FEAT 8
 Prerequisites
 Basic Wizard Spellcasting
You can cast more arcane spells each day. Increase the spell 
slots you gain from wizard archetype feats by 1 for each spell 
level other than your two highest spell levels. For example, at 
8th level you could prepare two level 1 spells, one level 2 spell, 
and one level 3 spell.
EXPERT WIZARD SPELLCASTING FEAT 12

Prerequisites
 Basic Wizard Spellcasting, master 
in Arcana
Add two level 4 spells to your spellbook. You gain a single 
level 4 spell slot that you can use to prepare a level 4 spell 
from your spellbook. You become an expert in spell rolls and 
spell DCs for casting arcane spells and in attacks you make 
with arcane spells.
At 14th level, add two level 5 spells to your spellbook, and 
you gain a level 5 spell slot that you can use to prepare a level
 5 
spell from your spellbook. At 8th level, add two level 6 spells 
to your spellbook, and you gain a level 6 spell slot that you can 
use to prepare a level 6 spell from your spellbook. 
MASTER WIZARD SPELLCASTING FEAT 18

Prerequisites
 Expert Wizard Spellcasting, legendary 
in Arcana
Add two level 7 spells to your spellbook. You gain a single 
level 7 spell slot that you can use to prepare a level 7 spell 
from your spellbook. You become a master in spell rolls and 
spell DCs for casting arcane spells and in attacks you make 
with arcane spells.
At 20th level, add two level 8 spells to your spellbook, and 
you gain a level 8 spell slot that you can use to prepare a level
 8 
spell from your spellbook.
Archetype
Archetype
Archetype
Archetype
Archetype
Archetype
284 Animal companions are loyal comrades who follow your 
orders. They have the minion trait, so they gain 2 actions during your turn if you use the Command an Animal action to command them; this is in place of the usual 
effects of Command an Animal. If your companion dies, you can spend a week of downtime to replace it at no cost. You can have only a single animal companion.
You or an ally can ride your animal companion as long 
as it is at least one size larger than the rider. If you do, it 
can use only its land Speed unless it has the mount special ability. In addition, if someone is riding your animal 
companion and it doesn't have the mount special ability, 
it can't use the Work Together action.
YOUNG COMPANIONS
The following are the base statistics for a starting animal 
companion (a young companion). Make adjustments for the 
type of animal, as well as adjustments for full-grown, savage, 
or nimble, and any specializations. Animal companions 
calculate their modifiers and DCs just as you do, though 
with the exception of barding allowing an item bonus to AC 
of up to +2, they never benefit from item bonuses. PROFICIENCIES
Your animal companion uses your level to determine its 
proficiency modifier. It's trained in its unarmed Strikes, 
unarmored defense, barding, all saving throws, Perception, 
Acrobatics, and Athletics. Animal companions can't use 
abilities that require greater intelligence, such as Coerce or 
Decipher Writing, even if trained in the appropriate skill, 
unless they have a specialization that allows it. ABILITY
 M
ODIFIERS
Your animal companion begins with base ability modifiers 
of Str +2, Dex +1, Con +0, Int –4, Wis
 +1, Cha –1.HIT
 P
OINTS
Your animal companion has ancestry Hit Points from its 
type, plus a number of Hit Points for each of your levels 
equal to 6 plus its Constitution modifier.
FULL-GROWN COMPANIONS
Make the following adjustments to a young companion to 
make it a full-grown companion. Increase the companion's 
Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, and Wisdom modifiers 
by 1. Increase its unarmed Strike damage from one die 
to two dice (for instance, from 1d8 to 2d8). Increase its 
proficiency rank for Perception and all saving throws to 
expert. If your companion is Medium or smaller, it grows 
in size by one category.
NIMBLE COMPANIONS
Make the following adjustments to a full-grown 
companion to make it a nimble companion. Increase the 
companion's Dexterity modifier by 2 and its Strength, 
Constitution, and Wisdom modifiers by 1. Increase its 
unarmed Strike damage from two dice to three dice. 
Increase its proficiency rank in Acrobatics to expert and 
its proficiency rank in unarmored defense to expert. It also 
learns its type's advanced action or activity.
SAVAGE COMPANIONS
Make the following adjustments to a full-grown companion 
to make it a savage companion. Increase the companion's 
Strength modifier by 2 and its Dexterity, Constitution, 
and Wisdom modifiers by 1. Increase its unarmed Strike 
damage from two dice to three dice. Increase its proficiency 
rank in Athletics to expert. It also learns its type's advanced 
action or activity. If your companion is Medium or smaller, 
it grows in size by one category.
COMPANION TYPES
Each companion type grants several benefits. The Size 
entry indicates your companion's starting size as a young 
companion. The Unarmed Strikes entry lists any unarmed 
Strikes the animal has. The Abilities entry lists which two 
ability modifiers the companion increases by 1. The Hit 
Points entry indicates the companion's starting ancestry 
Hit Points. The Skill entry indicates your companion's 
additional trained skill. The Senses entry, if present, lists 
your companion's special senses other than low-light 
vision (which all animals have). The Speed entry lists 
your companion's Speed and other movement types. The 
Special entry, if present, lists any other special abilities your 
companion has, including whether it ordinarily serves as 
a mount and is appropriate for mounted classes, such as 
the paladin. The Work Together Benefit entry
 indicates a 
special benefit you can gain by using Command an Animal 
to command the animal to use the Work Together action 
(see below). The Advanced Maneuver entry indicates a 
powerful new action or activity your companion learns 
how to use if it becomes a nimble or savage companion. WORK TOGETHER
Your animal companion assists you. You gain the benefits 
listed in your companion's Work Together Benefit entry. Your 
companion can use its other action only to move in order to get 
into position to take advantage of the Work Together benefits; if 
your companion doesn't have the mount special ability and you 
are riding it, it can't use any other actions this turn at all.
BADGER
Your companion is a badger, a wolverine, or another big mustelid.
Size
 Small Unarmed Strikes jaws, 
Damage 1d8 piercing;
claw (agile), 
Damage 1d6 slashingAbilities Con, Wis Hit Points
 8 Skill Survival
ANIMAL COMPANIONS
285 Senses scentSpeed 25 feet, burrow 10 feet, climb 10 feet
Work Together Benefit
 Your badger digs around your foe's 
position, interfering with its footing. Until your next turn, all 
your weapon Strikes against a creature your badger threatens 
add an enhancement that prevents the creature from using a 
Step action (unless it can Step through difficult terrain) until it 
moves from its current position.
Advanced Maneuver
 Badger Rage BADGER RAGE
Requirement
 You are not fatigued, raging, or 
wearing heavy barding.
You enter a state of pure rage for 3 rounds. While 
raging, you gain a conditional bonus to melee damage rolls equal 
to 1 plus your jaws' usual number of dice, or half that when 
using your claw (this damage doubles on a critical success as 
normal, but it doesn't also increase from the extra dice from 
the critical success). You also take a –1 penalty to AC and can't 
use concentrate actions that aren't also rage actions. After you 
stop raging, you can't use Badger Rage for 1 round, and you are 
fatigued for 1 round. If you stop raging before the usual duration 
expires, you are fatigued and can't use Badger Rage until after 
the end of your next turn.
BEARYour companion is a grizzly, panda, polar bear, or other type of bear.
Size
 Small Unarmed Strikes jaws, 
Damage 1d8 piercing;
claw (agile), 
Damage 1d6 slashingAbilities Str, Con
Hit Points
 8 Skill Intimidation
Senses scentSpeed 35 feetWork Together Benefit
 Your bear mauls your enemies when 
you create an opening. Until your next turn, all your weapon 
Strikes against a creature your bear threatens deal 1d8 
additional slashing damage. If your bear has a specialization, 
the additional slashing damage increases to 2d8.
Advanced Maneuver
 Bear Hug BEAR HUG
Requirements 
Your last action was a successful claw Strike.
Make another claw Strike against the same target. If your Strike 
hits, the target is also grabbed, as if you had succeeded at the 
Grapple action. BIRD
Your companion is a bird of prey, such as an eagle, a hawk, or an owl.
Size
 Small Unarmed Strikes jaws (finesse), 
Damage 1d6 piercing;
talon (agile, finesse), Damage 1d4 slashingAbilities Dex, Wis
Hit Points
 4 Skill StealthConcentrate
EmotionMentalSpeed 10 feet, fly 60 feetWork Together Benefit
 Your bird pecks at your enemies' eyes when 
you create an opening, causing them to bleed. Until your next turn, 
all your weapon Strikes against a creature your bird threatens add 
1d4 persistent bleed damage as an enhancement (the creature 
is also dazzled until it removes the bleed). If your bird has a 
specialization, the persistent bleed damage increases to 2d4.
Advanced Maneuver
 Flyby Attack
 FLYBY ATTACK
You Fly and make a talon Strike at any point along the way.
CATYour companion is a big cat, such as a leopard or tiger.
Size
 Small Unarmed Strikes jaws (finesse), 
Damage 1d6 piercing;
claw (agile, finesse), 
Damage 1d4 slashingAbilities Dex, Wis
Hit Points
 4 Skill StealthSenses scentSpeed 35 feetSpecial Your cat deals 1d6 additional precision damage against a 
flat-footed target.
Work Together Benefit
 Your cat throws your enemies ofi-balance 
when you create an opening. Until your next turn, all your 
weapon Strikes against a creature your cat threatens make 
the target flat-footed until the end of your next turn as an 
enhancement (flat-footed for 2 rounds on a critical success).
Advanced Maneuver
 Cat Pounce
286 CAT POUNCE
You Stride and then Strike. If you were unseen, 
you remain unseen until after the attack.
DRO
MA
EOS
AUR
Your companion is a dromaeosaur (also called a raptor), such as a 
velociraptor or deinonychus.
Size
 Small Unarmed Strikes jaws (finesse); 
Damage 1d8 piercing
talon (agile, finesse); Damage 1d6 slashingAbilities Dex, Con
Hit Points
 6 Skill StealthSenses scentSpeed 50 feetWork Together Benefit
 Your raptor constantly darts into flanking 
position. Until your next turn, your raptor counts as being in 
either its own space or an empty space you choose within 
10 feet of its current space for the purpose of determining 
whether you flank with your companion; you can choose 
different spaces for each of your Strikes, if you wish. 
Advanced Maneuver
 Darting Attack
 DARTING ATTACK
You move up to 10 feet and then Strike, or you 
Strike and then move up to 10 feet.
HORSE
Your companion is a horse, pony, or other similar equine.
Size
 Medium or Large Unarmed Strikes hoof (agile), Damage 1d6 bludgeoningAbilities Str, Con
Hit Points
 8 Skill Survival
Senses scentSpeed 40 feetSpecial mountWork Together Benefit
 Your horse enhances your mounted 
charges. Until your next turn, while you are riding your horse, 
all your weapon Strikes gain the benefits of the charge weapon 
trait. If your weapon already has the charge weapon trait, 
increase the additional damage by 1 per die.
Advanced Maneuver
 Gallop GALLOP
You Stride twice and are accelerated 10 during these 
Strides. SNAKE
Your companion is a nonvenomous constrictor snake, such as a 
boa or python.
Size
 Small Unarmed Strikes jaws (finesse); 
Damage 1d8 piercing
Abilities Str, Dex
Hit Points
 6 Skill StealthAttack
Move
Attack
Move
Move
Senses scentSpeed 20 feet, climb 20 feet, swim 20 feetWork Together Benefit
 Your snake holds your enemies down with 
its coils, interfering with their reactions. Until your next turn, 
creatures your snake threatens can't use reactions triggered by 
your weapon Strike or Stride actions unless the target is higher 
level than you.
Advanced Maneuver
 Constrict CONSTRICTRequirements 
You have a creature that is smaller than you 
Grabbed in your coils.
You deal 10 bludgeoning damage to the grappled creature. 
WOLF
Your companion is a wolf or other lupine or canine creature, such 
as a dog. Size
 Small Unarmed Strikes jaws (finesse); 
Damage 1d8 piercing
Abilities Dex, Con
Hit Points
 6 Skill Survival
Senses ScentSpeed 40 feetWork Together Benefit 
Your wolf tears at your enemies' tendons 
when you leave an opening, slowing down their movement. 
Until your next turn, all your weapon Strikes against a creature 
your wolf threatens make the target hampered 5 for 1 minute 
as an enhancement (hampered 10 on a critical success).
Advanced Maneuver
 Wolf Trip
 WOLF TRIP
Requirements 
Your last action was a successful jaws Strike.
Make a Trip attempt against the target of your jaws Strike, 
ignoring your multiple attack penalty.
SPECIALIZED COMPANIONS
Specialized companions are significantly more intelligent 
than other animals and can engage in more complex 
behaviors. The first time an animal companion gains a 
specialization, its proficiency rank for unarmed Strikes 
increases to expert, and saving throws and Perception 
increases to master. Increase its Dexterity modifier by 
1 and its Intelligence modifier by 2. Its unarmed Strike 
damage increases from three dice to four dice. Each of the 
following specializations grant additional benefits. Most 
animal companions can take only one specialization. AMBUS
HER
In your companion's natural environment, it can use a 
Sneak action even if it's currently observed. It gains a +1 
circumstance bonus to initiative rolls, its proficiency rank 
in Stealth increases to expert (or master if it was already trained from its type), and its Dexterity modifier increases by 1. Its proficiency rank for unarmored defense increases to expert, or master if it's nimble.
287 BULLY
Your companion terrorizes foes with displays of dominance 
and pushes them around the battlefield. Its proficiency ranks 
in Athletics and Intimidation increase to expert (or master 
if it was already trained from its type), its Strength modifier 
increases by 1, and its Charisma modifier increases by 3.DAREDEVIL
Your companion joins the fray with graceful leaps and 
swooping dives. It gains deny advantage, meaning it doesn't 
become flat-footed when flanked or when a creature is 
unseen or sensed unless the attacking creature is higher 
level than you. Its proficiency rank in Acrobatics increases 
to master, and its Dexterity modifier increases by 1. Its 
proficiency rank in unarmored defense increases to expert, 
or to master if it was already expert from being nimble. 
RACER
Your companion races. Its Speed, swim Speed, or fly Speed 
(your choice) increases by 10 feet as long as it isn't in heavy 
barding. Its proficiency rank in Fortitude saves increases to 
master, and its Constitution modifier increases by 1.
TRACKER
Your companion can move at full Speed while following 
tracks. Its proficiency rank for Survival increases to expert 
(or master if it was already trained from its type), and its 
Wisdom modifier increases by 1.
WRECKER
Your companion smashes things around it. If it deals more 
damage than an object's Hardness, it dents the object twice 
even if it doesn't deal twice the object's Hardness in damage. 
Its proficiency rank in Athletics increases to master, and its 
Strength modifier increases by 1.FAMILIARS
Familiars are mystically bonded creatures tied to your magic. Most familiars were originally animals, though the ritual of becoming a familiar makes them something more. You can choose a Tiny animal you want as your 
familiar, such as a bat, cat, frog, lizard, raven, or snake.
Familiars have the minion trait (see page 416), and so 
they gain 2 actions each round during an encounter, and 
you need to spend 1 action each round to command them. 
If your familiar dies, you can spend a week of downtime to 
replace it at no cost. You can't have more than one familiar.
MODIFIERS AND DC
SYour familiar's saving throw modifiers and AC are equal to 
your own, before applying any circumstance or conditional 
bonuses or penalties. Its Perception, Acrobatics, and Stealth 
modifiers are equal to your level plus your spellcasting 
ability modifier. If it needs to roll any other attack roll or 
skill check, it uses your level minus 2 as its modifier. It never 
benefits from ability modifiers or item bonuses. HIT
 P
OINTS
Your familiar has 4 Hit Points for each of your levels.
SIZE
Your familiar is Tiny.
SENSES
Your familiar has low-light vision. It can gain other senses 
from familiar abilities. Your familiar can communicate 
empathically with you as long as it's within 1 mile, sharing 
its feelings and emotions. It doesn't understand or speak 
any languages normally, though it can gain that ability 
from familiar abilities. MOVE
Your familiar has either a Speed of 25 feet or a swim 
Speed of 25 feet (choose one upon gaining the familiar). 
It can gain other movement types from familiar abilities. FAM
ILI
AR AND
 M
ASTER ABILITIES
Each day, you can channel your magic into two abilities 
chosen from familiar abilities, which affect your familiar, 
and master abilities, which affect you. If your familiar is an animal that naturally must have 
one of these familiar abilities (for instance, an owl has a fly 
Speed), you must select that ability, and your familiar can't 
be an animal that naturally has more familiar abilities than 
your daily maximum familiar abilities. FAM
ILI
AR A
BILITIES

Ł Climb Speed of 25 feet
Ł Darkvision
Ł Fly Speed of 25 feet
Ł Increase the Speed of one of the familiar's movement types 
from 25 feet to 40 feet

Ł Scent
Ł Swim Speed of 25 feet (or land Speed of 25 feet if your 
familiar already has a swim Speed)

Ł Understands and speaks one language you know
MASTER ABILITIES

Ł You can prepare one additional cantrip. You must be able to 
prepare cantrips to select this master ability.

Ł You can prepare one additional spell at least 3 levels lower 
than your highest-level spell; you must be able to prepare 
level
 4 spells to select this master ability.

Ł If your familiar is in your space, you can cast a spell with 
a range of touch, transfer its power to your familiar, and 
command the familiar to deliver the spell. If you do, the 
familiar uses its 2 actions for the round to move toward a 
target of your choice and attempt to touch that target; it uses 
your attack modifier for touch spells instead of its own if 
the target isn't willing. If the familiar hits or critically hits, 
the spell has its usual efiect. If the familiar misses or doesn't 
reach the target to touch it this turn, the spell has no efiect.
288 Alignment CGEdicts seek glory and adventure, drink
Anathema
 abide slavery, be mean or standoffish when drunk
Favored Weapon 
rapierDESN
AThe aloof Song of the Spheres presides over dreams, luck, stars, and travelers. Alignment CGEdicts explore new places, express yourself through art and 
song, find what life has to ofier, follow your dreams
Anathema
 cause fear or despair, cast 
nightmare
 or use similar 
magic to corrupt dreams
Favored Weapon 
starknifeERASTIL
Old Deadeye is god of family, farming, hunting, 
and trade. Long ago he was a horned god of the 
hunt, but his worship evolved to focus on rural communities. Alignment LGEdicts care for your home and family, fulfill your duties, keep the 
peace, protect the community
Anathema
 abandon your home in its time of need, choose 
yourself over your community, tarnish your reputation, tell lies
Favored Weapon 
longbow
GORU
MSoldiers call out prayers to Our Lord in Iron, 
god of battle, strength, and weapons. Alignment CNEdicts attain victory in fair combat, push your limits
Anathema
 kill prisoners or surrendering foes, prevent conflict 
through negotiation, win a battle through underhanded tactics 
or indirect magic
Favored Weapon 
greatsword
GOZRE
HA deity of two aspects, known as the Wind and 
the Waves, Gozreh rules over nature, the sea, 
and weather.
Alignment NEdicts cherish, protect, and respect nature in all its forms
Anathema
 bring civilization to intrude on the wild
Favored Weapon 
tridentIOMED
AEIomedae is goddess of honor, justice, rulership, 
and valor, called the Inheritor after inheriting 
her mantle when the god of humanity perished. Many paladins follow her faith. Alignment LGEdicts be temperate, fight for justice and honor, hold valor in 
your heart
Anathema
 abandon a companion in need, dishonor yourself, 
refuse a challenge from an equal
Favored Weapon 
longsword
While a cleric's selection of deity is critical, most characters 
pay respect to one or more deities, especially in times of 
hardship or need. Those who reject the divine might find 
themselves adrift in the afterlife, without a home for their 
souls to find peace, or possibly even sacrificed to stave off 
the end times. Each deity entry contains the following information, 
designed to help you roleplay a character who follows that 
deity. While only a cleric or paladin gains a mechanical 
effect from a deity's edicts, anathema, and favored 
weapon, any follower is likely to hold the edicts dear, 
feel guilty when performing anathema acts, and consider 
fighting with her deity's favored weapon.
Alignment the deity's alignment
Edicts behaviors the deity encourages
Anathema
 a few examples of acts that are anathema to the deity, 
considered to be blasphemous by the clergy
Favored Weapon
 the primary weapon associated with the deity, 
often used by the deity's clerics and other followers
ABADARThe Master of the First Vault holds sway over 
cities, the law, merchants, and wealth.
Alignment LNEdicts bring civilization to the frontiers, earn wealth through 
hard work and trade, follow the rule of law
Anathema
 engage in banditry or piracy, steal, undermine a 
law-abiding court
Favored Weapon 
crossbow
ASMODEUS
The Prince of Darkness reigns over contracts, 
pride, slavery, and tyranny. 
Alignment LEEdicts negotiate contracts to your best advantage, rule over 
weaker beings, show subservience to your betters
Anathema
 break a contract, free a slave, insult Asmodeus's pride
Favored Weapon 
maceCALISTRI
AThe mischievous goddess known as the Savored 
Sting exhorts lust, revenge, and trickery.
Alignment CNEdicts pursue your personal freedom, take revenge, seek 
hedonistic thrillsAnathema
 become too consumed by love or a need for revenge, 
let a slight go unanswered
Favored Weapon 
whipCAYDEN
 CAILE
ANThe Drunken Hero ascended from mortal life 
on a drunken dare, becoming the god of ale, 
freedom, and wine. DEITIES289 IRORI
The Master of Masters attained enlightenment  
and became god of history, knowledge, and 
self-perfection. Alignment LNEdicts be humble; help others perfect themselves; hone your 
body, mind, and spirit to a more perfect state; practice discipline
Anathema
 repeatedly fail to maintain self-control
Favored Weapon 
fistLAMA
SHTU
The Mother of Monsters is goddess of aberrance, 
monsters, and nightmares. Alignment CEEdicts bring power to the outcasts and downtrodden, indoctrinate 
children in Lamashtu's teachings, make the beautiful monstrous, 
reveal the corruption and flaws in all things
Anathema
 attempt to cure a madness or deformity, provide 
succor to Lamashtu's enemies (such as Desna)
Favored Weapon 
falchionNET
HYS
The All-Seeing Eye, god of magic, has a dualistic 
nature of destruction and preservation, as his 
ability to witness all things shattered his mind. Alignment NEdicts seek out magical power and use it
Anathema
 pursue mundane paths over magical ones
Favored Weapon 
stafiNORGORBER
The god of greed, murder, poison, and secrets has 
four aspects: the ally of poisoners and alchemists 
Blackfingers, the murderous Father Skinsaw, the thieving 
Gray Master, and the secretive Reaper of Reputation.
Alignment NEEdicts keep your true identity secret, sacrifice anyone if necessary, 
take every advantage in a fight, work from the shadows
Anathema
 allow your true identity to be connected to your dark 
dealings, share a secret freely, show mercy
Favored Weapon 
shortsword
PHA
RASMA
Ancient and powerful beyond even most other 
gods, the Lady of Graves presides over birth, 
death, fate, and prophecy.
Alignment NEdicts strive to understand ancient prophecies, destroy undead, 
lay bodies to rest
Anathema
 create undead, desecrate a corpse, rob a tomb
Favored Weapon 
daggerROV
AGUG
The Rough Beast is god of destruction, disaster, 
and wrath. He is imprisoned within Golarion's 
core and seeks to one day break free and wreak havoc. Alignment CEEdicts destroy all things, free Rovagug from his prison
Anathema
 create something new, let material ties restrain you, 
torture a victim or otherwise delay its destruction
Favored Weapon 
greataxe
SARENR
AEThe Dawnflower is goddess of healing, honesty, 
redemption, and the sun. She seeks to redeem 
evil where possible, or else destroy it swiftly.
Alignment NGEdicts destroy the spawn of Rovagug, protect allies, provide aid 
to the sick and wounded, seek and allow redemption
Anathema
 create undead, fail to strike down evil, lie, succumb 
to darknessFavored Weapon 
scimitarSHELYN
The Eternal Rose is the goddess of art, beauty, 
love, and music. She seeks to one day redeem 
her corrupted brother Zon-Kuthon. Alignment NGEdicts be peaceful, choose and perfect an art, lead by example, 
see the beauty in all thingsAnathema
 destroy works of art or allow one to be destroyed 
except to save a life or in pursuit of greater art, refuse to 
accept surrender
Favored Weapon 
glaive
TOR
AGThe dwarven deity called the Father of Creation 
is god of the forge, protection, and strategy.
Alignment LGEdicts be honorable and forthright, keep your word, respect the 
forge, serve your people
Anathema
 show mercy to the enemies of your people, tell lies or 
cheat someone, intentionally create inferior craftwork
Favored Weapon 
warhammer
URG
ATHOAThe amoral Pallid Princess oversees disease, 
gluttony, and undeath.
Alignment NEEdicts become undead upon death, create or protect the undead, 
sate your appetites
Anathema
 deny your appetites, destroy undead, sacrifice your life
Favored Weapon 
scytheZON
-KUT
HON
The Midnight Lord is god of darkness, envy, 
loss, and pain. Alignment LEEdicts bring pain to the world, mutilate your body
Anathema
 create permanent or long-lasting sources of light, 
provide comfort to those who sufier
Favored Weapon 
spiked chain290 A Pathfinder adventure will take you to new lands, bring you into 
conflict with monsters and villainous rivals, and introduce you to new 
friends and allies. The major rules governing how your decisions and 
deeds affect the world around you are detailed in full in this chapter.
d20 and identify the modifiers, bonuses, and penalties that 
apply to the result of the roll; calculate the result; compare 
the result to a DC; and determine the effect. 
1. IDENTIFY MODIFIERS, 
BONUSES, AND PENALTIES
After you roll your d20, you'll identify all the relevant 
modifiers, bonuses, and penalties that need to be applied to 
the roll. A modifier can be either positive or negative, but a 
bonus is always positive and a penalty is always negative. 
Most rolls include at least an ability modifier, which is 
based on one of your ability scores, and a proficiency 
modifier, which is based on your level of training. Other 
bonuses and penalties may come from magic, the situation 
at hand, or other sources. Ability ModifierAn ability modifier represents your raw capabilities, and 
is derived from an ability score, as described on page
 8. 
Nearly all checks are keyed to an ability, and different types 
of checks require different ability modifiers, according to 
the nature of the checks. For example, Stealth is a Dexterity-based skill because 
it relies on grace and quickness, but attacking with a 
battleaxe is Strength based, because it relies upon physical 
power to be effective. The rules indicate which ability 
modifier to use, but the GM might sometimes determine 
that you should use a different ability modifier.
Proficiency Modifier
Your proficiency rank represents your degree of training in 
a weapon, a skill, or many other things. Your class and feat 
choices determine your proficiency ranks. For example, 
a fighter gets high proficiency ranks in many types of 
weapons and armor, while a wizard gets little in these 
categories, exchanging martial prowess for proficiencies 
related to magic. Unless your class, a feat, or some other ability makes 
your proficiency rank trained or better, you're assumed to 
be untrained at a task. As your character gains levels, your 
proficiency rank can increase. If you're ever in a situation 
where more than one proficiency could apply, use your 
highest applicable proficiency rank. For example, if you 
are trained in all simple weapons but an expert in daggers 
specifically, you'd use expert proficiency when attacking 
Before diving into how to play, it's important to understand 
the different modes of play, which depend on the story and 
the pace of the adventure. Each mode of play is suited to a 
different flow of time in the game world and level of risk to 
the players. The Game Master is in charge of determining 
which mode works best for what the characters are up to, 
and controls the transitions between modes. Each mode 
has its own rules for resolving actions and activities. In encounter mode, time is divided into a series of rounds, each lasting 6 seconds. On every round, each participant has a turn to act and take a number of discrete actions. This mode of play is most often used for combat or other high-stakes situations. The rules for encounter 
mode begin on page 304.In exploration mode, time is more flexible and the style 
of play more free-form. Here, minutes or even hours in 
the game world could pass quickly in the real world. This 
mode of play is frequently used when traveling, exploring 
a dungeon, or roleplaying in a town. Developments in 
exploration mode can lead to encounters, causing play to 
alternate between encounter mode and exploration mode 
as the story unfolds. The rules for exploration mode can be 
found starting on page 316.In downtime mode, the players are at little risk, and the 
passage of time is measured in days or even longer units of 
time. Forging a magic sword, researching a new spell, or 
retraining a feat are all activities that you might undertake 
in this mode of play. The rules for downtime mode can be 
found on page 318.The first section of this chapter presents general rules 
all players should understand. You'll use these in every 
mode of play to resolve a wide variety of scenarios and 
challenges. Subsequent sections dive into the specifics of 
tactical combat, exploring environments, and downtime. CHECKSThe GM will call upon you to attempt a check whenever 
you need to resolve a conflict or test your aptitude at a 
particular task or challenge. Examples include any attempt 
to attack another creature in combat, using skills, and 
resisting the effects of a dangerous spell that has been cast 
upon you. Checks are attempted against the difficulty class 
(DC) of the task or challenge to determine success or failure. 
When you attempt a check, you'll take these steps: roll a 
PLAYING THE GAME
291with a dagger. The only exception to this is that when 
calculating your Armor Class while carrying a shield, your 
proficiency rank is the lower of your proficiency ranks with 
the armor you wear or the shield you carry.
Proficiency Rank
ModifierUntrainedYour level – 2
Trained
Your level
ExpertYour level + 1
MasterYour level + 2
Legendary
Your level + 3
You have a proficiency rank for all the following items, 
types of rolls, and DCs. Proficiency
Roll or DC
Weapons, unarmed attacks, 
other types of attacks
Attack rolls
ArmorArmor Class*
ShieldsArmor Class*
Perception
Perception checks and DC
Each skillSkill checks and DCsEach type of saving THROWSaving throws and DCs
Spell rolls
Spell rolls and DCs
* When calculating AC while carrying a shield, apply the lower of 
your armor proficiency rank or your shield proficiency rank.
You have all lower proficiency ranks (other than 
untrained) in addition to your current rank. For example, if you have reached the master proficiency rank, you can still select feats that require expert rank or trained rank. Bonuses
Beneficial circumstances, conditions, items, and spells 
might give you bonuses to a roll in one of three types. 
A circumstance bonus is based on a beneficial situation, 
the culmination of a tactic, or some other situational 
benefit. Circumstance bonuses range from +1 to +4.Conditional bonuses are typically the result of magic or abilities applying helpful, often temporary conditions to you. Conditional bonuses range from +1 to +4. Some common conditions appear in the list of basic conditions on page 320. Conditional bonuses are also granted by some magic items, depending on the effect—for example, if an item granted you the benefits of heroism, you'd get conditional bonuses rather than item bonuses. An item bonus applies when you receive a benefit 
from a piece of gear. High-quality or magical items often 
grant an item bonus when used or worn, from +1 to +5. 
If you gain multiple bonuses of the same type, only the highest bonus applies—you don't add them together. For 
instance, being behind cover grants you a +2 circumstance bonus to AC. Using Raise a Shield with a light shield grants you a +1 circumstance bonus to AC. If you are both behind cover and raising a light shield, you gain only the +2 circumstance bonus for cover, since it's the higher.
PenaltiesNegative circumstances, harmful conditions and spells, 
and inferior items can impede your rolls. There are four 
different types of penalties. Circumstance penalties are applied due to the environment, enemies' tactics, and other situational 
reasons. For instance, being flanked by a pair of foes can make you flat-footed, which imposes a –2 circumstance penalty to your Armor Class and Touch Armor Class. 
Circumstance penalties range from –1 to –4.Conditional penalties are caused by negative conditions. Being sick 2, for example, imposes a –2 conditional penalty to all your checks and DCs. Conditional penalties 
range from –1 to –4. Some standardized conditions appear in the list of basic conditions on page 320.Item penalties
 occur when using poor-quality or cursed 
items, in the same way that better items provide item bonuses. Item penalties range from –1 to –4.As with bonuses, if you gain multiple circumstance, conditional, or item penalties, only the worst penalty of each type applies. However, there's also a special, fourth 
kind of penalty that doesn't have a type, called an 
untyped penalty. These include the multiple attack penalty (see page 305) and the check penalty from your armor (see page 176). All relevant untyped penalties combine and 
apply to your roll, no matter how many different ones you have. Untyped penalties are always the result of 
choices you've made, and are never forcibly applied to 
your character by an opponent or situation.2. 
CALCULATE THE RESULT
Once you've identified the modifiers, bonuses, and penalties 
that apply to your roll, you calculate the result (sometimes 
called a "total") using the following formula. 
Result of a roll = number on the die + ability modifier + 
proficiency modifier + circumstance bonus + 
conditional bonus + item bonus + circumstance penalty + 
conditional penalty + item penalty + untyped penalties3. 
DETERMINE THE DIFFICULTY CLASS (DC)
The result of your check is compared against a Difficulty 
Class (often abbreviated as DC) to determine how well you 
did. For tasks that aren't opposed by another character, the 
GM will set the DC depending on the difficulty of what 
you're trying to achieve. For tasks opposed by another character, the DC is based 
on one of the target's modifiers, as defined in the task. A 
DC derived in this way is equal to 10 plus the creature's 
modifier for that type of roll. All modifiers, bonuses, and 
penalties that would apply to the character's rolls for a task 
also apply to its DC unless noted otherwise. For example, 
if you're trying to sneak past a guard, you attempt a Stealth 
check opposed by the guard's Perception DC. If you have a 
+5STealth and they have a +3 Perception, you roll 1d20+5 
against their Perception DC of 13. 
292 Armor Class 
Armor Class (AC) is a special type of DC used to defend against attacks. It's how you measure whether an attack 
hits or misses you, and it is usually modified if you are wearing armor, have a high Dexterity score, or have a 
special ability that makes you more nimble or defensive. You usually determine your AC while creating your 
character, as described on page 16.
Touch Armor Class 
Some effects, items, or abilities (such as spells) require only 
contact, not a solid impact, to hit. This is called a touch 
attack. To determine if a touch attack hits a target, make 
an attack roll (either melee or ranged, as appropriate) 
and compare the result to the target's Touch Armor Class 
(TAC). Your TAC is calculated as described on page 16, 
and it is typically lower than your AC. 
Anything that gives you a bonus or penalty to Armor Class also gives you an equal bonus or penalty to Touch 
Armor Class unless stated otherwise.4. 
DETERMINE THE DEGREE OF SUCCESS
Comparing a result to a DC determines which of the four 
degrees of success you achieve—success, critical success, 
failure, or critical failure. This tells you whether (and how 
spectacularly) you succeeded or failed. Some checks don't 
specify every degree of success. If no critical success or critical 
failure is specified, use the effect of an ordinary success or 
failure, respectively. If no success or failure is described, 
nothing happens depending on what isn't described.
Success and Critical Success
If your result is equal to or greater than the DC, you 
succeed and apply any success effect (or generally achieve 
what you set out to do). However, if you succeed and 
rolled a 20 on the die (often called a "natural 20"), or 
if your result is equal to or greater than the DC plus 10, 
you critically succeed. You apply the critical success effect 
instead of the success effect. If the critical success was an 
attack roll, it is sometimes called a critical hit. Critical successes usually have greater effects than 
regular successes. For instance, if you succeed at a Strike, 
you deal damage, but if you critically succeed, you deal 
double damage. If an ability doesn't specify a critical 
success effect, then the effect for a critical success is the 
same as that for a success. A critical success counts as a 
success for rules that have different effects depending on 
whether you succeed or fail. If your enemy is far more powerful than you or a task 
beyond your abilities, you might roll a natural 20 and 
still get a result lower than the DC. In this case, you 
succeed instead of critically succeed or fail. If you lack the 
proficiency for a task in the first place, or it's impossible, 
you might still fail on a natural 20.Failure and Critical Failure
If your result is less than the DC, you fail. For actions you 
initiated, this typically means there is no effect. If you were 
rolling a saving throw, failing generally means you are 
affected by a spell or ability. If there is no failure effect 
listed, the ability simply has no effect if it fails. 
If you fail and roll a 1 on the d20 (also called a "natural 
1"), or you fail and your result is equal to or less than the 
DC minus 10, you critically fail instead of just failing. A 
critical failure is sometimes called a "fumble." If an action 
or activity does not specify a critical failure effect, then the 
effect for a critical failure is the same as that for a failure. The effects of a critical failure are often more detrimental 
than those for a failure and can be debilitating or even 
deadly. If an ability does not specify a critical failure effect, 
then the effect for a critical failure is the same as that for 
a failure. A critical failure counts as a failure for rules that 
have different effects depending on whether you succeed 
or fail. It might be possible in some situations to meet the 
DC even on a 1. If your roll would equal or exceed the 
DC even on a 1, you don't critically fail, but you still fail 
instead of succeeding. You can't succeed when you roll a 1 
no matter what your modifier is. 
FLAT CHECKS
When there's a chance something will happen or fail to 
happen based on pure chance, you attempt a flat check. 
A flat check never includes any modifiers, bonuses, or 
penalties—you just roll the d20 and compare the result 
on the die to the DC. Specific effects might adjust your 
DC for certain types of flat checks, but abilities that don't 
specifically call out flat checks can't change their DCs.
If more than one flat check would ever cause or prevent the same thing, just roll once using the highest DC. In the 
rare circumstance that a flat check has a DC of 1 or lower, 
skip rolling; you automatically succeed. Conversely, if 
one ever has a DC of 21 or higher, you automatically fail.
Number on the dieIf you have more than one 
penalty of a particular type, apply only the worst.
Circumstance penalty
Conditional penaltyItem penaltyUntyped penalties= ResultItem bonus
Circumstance bonus
Conditional bonus
Ability modifierProficiency modifier
If you have more than one 
bonus of a particular type, apply only the highest. ModifiersCALCULAT
ING RESULTS
+++293 SECRET CHECKS
When a player shouldn't know the exact result of a roll for 
their character, the rules call for a secret check. The secret 
trait appears on anything that uses secret checks. This 
type of check uses the character's normal modifier, but is 
rolled by the GM, who doesn't reveal the result. Instead, 
she simply describes any information or effects that result 
from the check. If a player doesn't know a secret check is 
happening (for instance, if the GM rolls a secret Fortitude 
save for a player against a poison that he failed to notice), 
he can't activate a fortune or misfortune ability (see the 
sidebar) on that check, but any such effect that would 
apply automatically to that type of check still applies. If 
a player knows the GM is attempting a secret check—as 
often happens with Recall Knowledge or Seek—he can 
activate fortune or misfortune abilities. The GM can make any check secret, even if it's not 
usually secret. Conversely, the GM can let the players 
roll any or all of their checks even if they would usually 
be secret, trusting players not to make choices based on 
information their characters don't have.
OTHER ROLLS
Once you know that your action or ability is successful, you might need to make a different kind of roll to know what effect it has. These rolls will use a different number and type of dice, using the dice notation described on page 11. The result of such a roll is the sum of the number rolled on all the dice plus all modifiers, bonuses, 
and penalties that apply. You don't compare this result of 
this roll to a DC unless otherwise noted. A damage roll (see below) is a common example of this type of roll. DAMAGE
Attacks, traps, spells, and hazardous environments can all 
cause damage to a character. Damage decreases Hit Points 
on a 1-to-1 basis (so a creature that takes 6 damage loses 
6 Hit Points). Damage might be a fixed amount, or it might 
be determined by a damage roll. A damage roll typically 
uses a number and type of dice determined by the weapon 
or unarmed attack used or the spell cast. Damage can be 
affected by immunities, resistances, and weaknesses (see 
page 294). See page 294 for more on Hit Points. 
DAMAGE TYPES
Damage comes in many different types. Weapons, spells, 
and abilities indicate the types of damage they deal, and immunities, resistances, and weaknesses function against certain damage types. An effect that deals a type of damage gains the matching trait, if appropriate. Bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing damage typically comes from weapons; these types are collectively called physical damage. Spells, special weapons, and environmental dangers can cause many other types of damage. Acid, cold, electricity, fire, and sonic are all 
types of energy damage. Force damage comes from pure magical energy and can damage ethereal creatures, such as ghosts. Negative damage harms the life force of living 
creatures, and positive damage hurts undead. Effects that exist purely in the target's mind deal mental damage. 
Weapons and effects keyed to a particular alignment can 
deal chaotic, evil, good, or lawful damage. Special materials (see page 354) can modify a type of damage. For example, an adamantine greataxe would deal adamantine slashing damage. This largely matters 
for resistances and weaknesses. Precision damage increases an attack's damage rather 
than being a separate pool of damage. For example, a dagger Strike that deals 1d6 precision damage from sneak attack increases the piercing damage by 1d6. A creature that was immune to precision damage would ignore the 1d6 but take the rest of the damage from the Strike. 
DOUBLING AND HALVING DAMAGE
Sometimes you'll have to halve or double an amount of 
damage. When you halve damage, you roll the normal damage specified and halve the resulting number, rounding 
down. You do this whether the damage is delivered by an 
effect with an attack roll or one that required a creature to attempt a save. How you double damage depends on the effect's 
delivery. If the damage comes from an effect with an 
attack roll, you roll double the normal number of dice and 
apply all damage modifiers, bonuses, and penalties twice. 
If the damage comes from an effect allowing a creature 
to attempt a saving throw, you double the damage total 
instead, rather than rolling more dice. 
For example, if you critically hit with a 
+1 longsword, you would roll 4d8 and add your modifier twice instead 
of rolling 2d8 and adding your modifier once. On the 
other hand, if one of your enemies critically fails its 
saving throw against your 3rd-level 
fireball spell, you 
would roll 6d6 damage and then double that total. For 
instance, if you rolled 21 damage, those who critically 
fail their saves against the spell would take 42 fire 
damage instead. ROLLING TWICE AND REROLLS
Fortune and misfortune Effects can alter how you roll your dice. 
These abilities might allow you to reroll a failed roll, force you to 
reroll a successful roll, allow you to roll twice and take the higher 
result, or force you to roll twice and take the lower result.
You can never have more than one fortune or misfortune Effect 
come into play on a single roll. For instance, if you roll twice and 
take the higher roll, you can't use Halfling Luck to reroll if you still 
fail. If multiple fortune Effects would apply, you have to pick which 
to use. If two misfortune Effects apply, the GM decides which is 
worse and applies it.
If you are subject to both a fortune Effect and a misfortune Effect 
on the same roll, the two cancel each other out and you roll normally.
294 NONLETHAL ATTACKS
You can make a nonlethal attack in an effort to knock 
someone out instead of killing them (see Getting Knocked 
Out on page 295). Weapons with the nonlethal trait 
(including fists) do this automatically.
If you're making a nonlethal attack with a weapon that 
doesn't have the nonlethal trait, calculate your attack 
roll's result as if you were untrained with the weapon. 
Likewise, you can attempt lethal attacks with a weapon 
that has the nonlethal feature, also calculating your attack 
roll's result as though you were untrained.
IMMUNITY, WEAKNESS, AND RESISTANCE
Protections against certain types of effects or damage are known as immunities or resistances, while vulnerabilities are called weaknesses. Apply immunities first, then weaknesses, and resistances third. Immunity, weakness, 
or resistance to an alignment applies only to damage of that type, not to damage from an attacking creature of that alignment. Immunity
A creature with immunity to a specific type of damage or trait can't be affected by that type of damage or by 
effects with that trait. Though the creature can still be targeted by such attacks or effects, it ignores all damage, drawbacks, and benefits. If the creature also has resistance or weakness to a type of damage it has immunity to, the immunity takes precedence. Usually immunity applies to a certain trait but might be more specific, like immunity 
to arcane cold spells. Weakness
When a creature has a weakness to a certain type of damage 
or damage from a certain source, increase that damage by 
the amount of the creature's weakness. For instance, if a 
creature takes 2d6 fire damage and has weakness 5 to fire, 
it takes 2d6+5 fire damage instead. If the creature has more than one type of weakness that 
would apply to the same instance of damage, use only 
the highest applicable weakness value. This usually only 
happens when a monster is weak to both a type of physical 
damage and the material a weapon is made of. ResistanceA creature with resistance reduces damage dealt to it by 
the amount listed in its resistance entry (to a minimum of 0 damage). Resistance can specify damage types or certain other properties of attacks. For instance, a creature might be resistant to nonmagical bludgeoning damage, meaning it would take less damage from bludgeoning attacks that weren't magical, but would take normal damage from a 
+1 mace or a nonmagical spear. A resistance might have 
an exception. For example, resistance 10 to physical damage (except silver) would reduce any physical damage by 10 unless that damage was dealt by a silver weapon. If the creature has more than one type of resistance that 
would apply to the same instance of damage, use only the 
highest applicable resistance value. It's possible to have resistance to all damage. If you 
have resistance to all damage, apply the resistance to each source separately. If an attack would deal 7 slashing 
damage and 4 fire damage, resistance 5 to all damage would reduce the slashing damage to 2 and negate the fire damage. Weakness and Resistance Interactions
Sometimes a magic item or a spell that inflicts a weakness or grants a resistance interacts with a creature's intrinsic 
weaknesses and resistances or other effects that grant weaknesses or resistances. If you have a weakness to a damage type and gain a resistance to it, first lower the weakness by the amount of the resistance. After this, if there is any remaining resistance, that amount becomes 
the actual resistance. For example, if you have weakness 
5 to fire, but gain resistance 10 to fire, your weakness is 
reduced to 0 and you gain resistance 5 to fire instead. This works the same way if you have a resistance and 
gain a weakness. Since multiple weaknesses and resistances 
aren't cumulative, determine the highest weakness and 
the highest resistance before comparing the weakness and 
resistance to each other.
DAMAGE AND ENHANCEMENTS
Some abilities that deal damage have enhancements. These take effect only if you deal at least 1 damage. For instance, if you use a poisoned blade to attack a creature with slashing resistance and the creature takes no damage because of its resistance, it's not exposed to your poison. 
HIT POINTS AND HEALING
All creatures have Hit Points (HP). Your maximum Hit 
Point value represents your health, wherewithal, and 
heroic drive when you are in good health and rested. Your 
maximum Hit Points include the HP you gain at 1st level 
from your race and class, those you gain at higher levels 
from your class, and any you gain from other sources (like 
the Toughness general feat). When you're dealt damage, 
you reduce your current Hit Points by a number equal to 
the damage dealt. 
Some spells and other effects can heal living or undead 
creatures. When you are healed, you regain Hit Points equal 
to the amount healed, up to your maximum Hit Points. When most creatures reach 0 Hit Points, they die, unless 
the attack was nonlethal, in which case they are knocked 
out for a significant amount of time (usually 1 minute 
or more). When undead and construct creatures reach 
0 Hit Points, they are destroyed. Player characters don't 
automatically die when they reach 0 Hit Points. Instead, 
they are knocked out. Villains, powerful monsters, 
enemies with healers or regeneration, and any other NPCs 
at the GM's discretion are knocked out like a PC as well.
295 GETTING KNOCKED OUT
When you're reduced to 0 Hit Points, you get knocked out. 
When this happens, you are subject to the following effects:
Ł You fall unconscious (gaining the unconscious condition).

Ł You immediately move your initiative position to directly 
before
 the creature or Effect that reduced you to 0 HP.

Ł If the attack was lethal, you gain the dying 1 condition. If you 
already had the dying condition, instead increase your dying 
condition by 1. If the attack was a critical hit, you gain the 
dying 2 condition (or increase your dying condition by 2). 

Ł If the attack was nonlethal, you do not gain the dying condition 
or increase your dying condition, and you return to 1 Hit Point 
(though you remain unconscious).
If your dying condition reaches 4 or greater, you die.
Recovery Saving Throws
When you're unconscious, at the start of each of your 
turns you attempt a special Fortitude saving throw to regain consciousness, called a recovery saving throw. 
The GM sets the DC of your recovery saving throw when 
you're knocked out. This DC equals the DC of the spell or 
ability that dropped you plus your current dying value. If damage that reduced you to 0 Hit Points came from something that doesn't have a DC, such as an attack roll, 
use the attacker's class DC. Though a class DC usually 
includes the key ability modifier for a character's class, 
the GM might sometimes decide a different ability score is appropriate; for example, a wizard's class DC usually 
uses Intelligence, but if he knocks someone out with his staff, the DC might use Strength or Dexterity. For 
monsters, the GM will use a high-difficulty skill DC of 
the monster's level (see page 336).
Always use the recovery DC determined at the time you 
were knocked out—if the attacker's DC changes later, your 
recovery save DC doesn't retroactively change to match.
Recovery Save Effects
The possible effects of a recovery save depend on whether 
you're at 0 Hit Points (at risk of dying) or at 1 Hit Point (stabilized with a chance to wake up).If you are at 0 Hit Points:Success You return to 1 Hit Point.
Failure
 Your dying value increases by 1.
Critical Failure
 Your dying value increases by 2.
If you are at 1 Hit Point or more:Success You become conscious and can take your turn 
normally, although you lose 1 action this turn (so in most 
cases, you can take only 2 actions). You still have the 
dying condition. Reducing the Dying ConditionAt the end of each of your turns while you have at least 1 Hit Point and are conscious, you reduce your dying value by 1. As with other conditions, when the dying 
value reaches 0, the dying condition ends. Taking Damage while Unconscious
If you take damage while you're already unconscious, apply the same effects as if you had been knocked out by that damage. If the recovery save DC for the new damage is higher than your current recovery save DC, start using the higher DC.296 Heroic Recovery
You can spend 1 Hero Point (see page 300) to lose the 
dying condition and return to 1 Hit Point (if you are at 0 
Hit Points) no matter how close to death you are. 
DEATH EFFECTS AND INSTANT DEATH
Some spells and abilities can kill you immediately or bring you closer to death without needing to reduce you to 0 Hit Points first. These abilities have the death trait and usually involve negative energy: the antithesis of life. 
If you are reduced to 0 Hit Points by a death effect, you 
are slain instantly without needing to reach dying 4. Some 
effects might state that they kill you outright, which means 
you gain the dead condition without having to reach 
dying 4. Other abilities can inflict the dying condition 
directly, without having to reduce you to 0 Hit Points or to 
damage you when you're already at 0 Hit Points. 
MASSIVE DAMAGE
You die instantly if you ever take damage equal to or 
greater than double your maximum Hit Points. 
TEMPORARY HIT POINTS
Some spells or abilities give you temporary Hit Points. 
Keep track of these separately from your other Hit Points, 
and when you take damage, reduce your temporary Hit 
Points first. Most temporary Hit Points last for a limited 
duration. You can't heal lost temporary Hit Points through 
healing, but you can gain more via other abilities. You can 
have temporary Hit Points from only one source at a time. 
If you gain temporary HP when you already have some, 
choose whether to keep the amount you already have and 
their corresponding duration or to gain the new temporary 
Hit Points and their duration. ACTIONS AND ACTIVITIES
The primary ways you affect the world around you are actions and activities. 
Actions can be completed in a very 
short time. They're self-contained and their effects are generated within the span of that single action. During an encounter, you get three actions on your turn and can 
take them as described on page 305.Activities usually take longer and require using multiple 
actions, which must be spent in succession. Stride is an 
action, but casting fireball is an activity, because it lists the 
specific actions that need to be spent to generate its effect. 
ACTIVITIES
An activity typically involves spending multiple actions 
to create an effect that's different from merely the sum of 
those actions. In some cases, usually with spellcasting, an 
activity can take only 1 action, 1 reaction, or 1 free action. 
An activity might cause you to take specific actions. You 
don't have to spend additional actions to perform them 
because they're already factored into the activity's required 
actions. (See Dependant Abilities.)You have to do an activity all at once. In an encounter, 
this means you must complete it during your turn, but outside of encounters, activities can take minutes, hours, 
or days. If an activity gets interrupted in an encounter, you 
lose all the actions you committed to it. For an activity that occurs outside of encounter mode, you usually lose the time you put in, but no additional time beyond that. An activity doesn't count as any of its dependent actions 
or other abilities. For example, the quick condition you get from the haste spell lets you spend an extra action each turn to Stride or Strike, but you couldn't use the 
extra action for an activity that includes a Stride or Strike. 
As another example, if you took an action that specified, "If the next action you use is a Strike," an activity that 
includes a Strike wouldn't count, because the next thing 
you are doing is starting an activity, not using the Strike 
basic action. 
DEPENDENT ABILITIES
An action, activity, free action, or reaction might call 
on you to use a simpler ability—usually one of the actions under Basic Actions on page 307—in a different circumstance or with different effects. The dependent ability still has its normal traits and is modified in any 
ways listed in the more complex ability. For example, 
an activity that tells you to Stride up to double your 
Speed modifies the Stride action by changing how far AT DEATH'S DOOR
The following conditions are crucial to understand death and dying.
DEADYou are no longer alive. You can't act or be aflected by spells that 
target creatures (unless they specifically target dead creatures), 
and for all other purposes you count as an object. When you gain 
the dead condition, you go to 0 HP if you had a different amount, 
and you can't be brought above 0 HP as long as you remain dead.
DYINGYou are bleeding out or otherwise at death's door. Dying always 
includes a value, and if it ever reaches dying 4, you die. If you're 
dying, the recovery saving throws from the unconscious condition 
determine whether you get better or worse (see page 295). If 
you have 1 HP or more and are conscious, your dying condition 
decreases by 1 at the end of your turn each round.
UNCONSCIOUS
You've been knocked out. You can't act; you have the blinded, 
deafened, and flat-footed conditions; and you take a –4 conditional 
penalty to AC. When you gain this condition, you fall prone and 
drop items you are wielding or holding unless the Effect states 
otherwise or the GM determines you're in a position in which you 
wouldn't. You must attempt a recovery saving throw (see page 
295) at the start of each of your turns.
297you can move. The dependent ability doesn't gain any of 
the main ability's traits unless specified. As noted under 
Activities, the ability that allows you to use the dependent action doesn't require you to spend more actions or 
reactions to use it; the cost is already figured in. REACTIONS AND FREE ACTIONS
In response to certain events, you can use reactions and 
free actions. Each reaction or free action lists a trigger that must happen for you to perform it. When its trigger is satisfied, you can use the reaction or free action as long as you're not otherwise prevented from doing so. You 
don't have to use it if you don't want to. There are far 
fewer basic reactions and free actions that all characters 
can use than there are basic actions. Your class, feats, and 
magic items all might allow you to use specific reactions and free actions. Reactions are usually triggered by other creatures or by 
events outside your control. In an encounter, you can use 
only 1 reaction between the start of one of your turns and 
the start of your next turn. Outside of encounters, it's more 
flexible and is up to the GM. Free actions are usually triggered by actions that you 
use, but many can trigger at the start or end of a turn. 
Unlike reactions, there's no limit to how many free actions 
you can use. The exception is that you can use only 1 free 
action for a given trigger.
TRIGGERS
The triggers listed in the stat blocks of reactions and free 
actions limit when you can use them. You can use only 
1 free action on a single trigger, but you can take both 
a free action and a reaction on the same trigger. If you 
somehow get more than 1 reaction per round, you can also 
use only 1 reaction per trigger. If two triggers are similar, 
but not identical, the GM determines whether you can use 
multiple free actions or reactions. This limitation is per 
creature; more than one creature can use a reaction or free 
action on a single trigger.
For instance, anyone can Drop an item with a free action, and its trigger (see below) is quite flexible! If you had an item in each hand, you could Drop one at the start of your turn and the other when you start to use an action, but you couldn't drop two when you start to use 
an action because that's only a single trigger.
Trigger
 Your turn begins, your turn ends, or you start to use 
an action. 
DISRUPTING
Various abilities and conditions, such as an Attack of 
Opportunity, can disrupt
 an action, reaction, free action, or activity. When an action, reaction, free action, or 
activity is disrupted, you don't benefit from the effects, 
though you still spend any actions or reactions and pay any costs. In the case of an activity, you usually lose all 
actions spent for the activity up through the end of that turn. For instance, a disrupted spellcasting action (see 
page 196) causes you to lose all the spellcasting actions you've committed to that activity. The GM will decide 
what effects a disruption causes if it isn't simply negating 
the effects that would have occurred. For instance, a Leap disrupted midway usually wouldn't send you back to 
the start of your jump, and an interrupted item transfer might cause the item to fall to the ground. EFFECTSWhen you spend an action, a reaction, or a free action or you engage in an activity, you do so to generate an 
effect. Effects are how you interact with and affect the game world. Many times just performing an action or 
completing an activity generates an effect. For instance, if you use the Stride action, the effect is that you move up to your Speed. Other times, you have to roll to determine what effect you generate. Unless an action, reaction, free action, or activity states otherwise, it affects a single creature or object (often, it affects only you). Some of these—especially spells—have 
area effects instead, meaning they can affect all creatures and objects within the specified area (see page 299).An effect might follow some of these common rules. 
DURATION
Some effects last for a certain duration rather than being resolved instantly. Once the duration has elapsed, 
the effect expires and ends. The rules use the following 
wording for durations in general, though spells have 
some special types detailed on page 196.For an effect that lasts a certain number of rounds, its 
remaining duration decreases by 1 at the start of each turn 
of the creature that created the effect. This is a common 
duration for spells or beneficial effects targeting you or 
your allies. Detrimental effects often last until the end of 
the target's next turn or through a number of their turns 
(such as "through the target's next 3 turns"), which means 
that their duration decreases at the end of the turn rather 
than the start. A duration might also end only when a requirement 
is met or ceases to be true. These effects last while that requirement is met or until it's met, respectively.
RANGE AND REACH
Actions and other abilities that generate an effect typically work within a specified range or a reach. Ranged and thrown weapons have a range increment listed in feet. Attacks with such weapons work normally 
up to that range. Attacks against targets beyond that range 
take a –2 penalty, which worsens by 2 for every additional 
multiple of that range, to a maximum of a –10 penalty 
after five additional range increments. Attacks beyond 
this range are not possible. For example, if you are using 
a shortbow, your attacks take no penalty against a target 
298up to 60 feet away, a –2 penalty if a target is 65 to 120 feet 
away, a –4 if a target is 125 to 180 feet away, and so on, up 
to a maximum of 300 feet. For spells and arcane or divine 
actions that list a range, the range is simply the farthest 
distance the effect can travel. Reach is how far you can physically reach with your 
body or a weapon. Melee Strikes rely on reach. Your 
reach also creates an area around your space where other 
creatures could trigger reactions. Your reach is typically 
5 feet but weapons with the reach trait can extend this. 
Larger creatures can have greater reach; for instance, an 
ogre has a 10-foot reach. 
LINE OF EFFECT
You usually need an unblocked path to the target of a spell, 
the origin point of an area, or the place where you create 
something with a spell or other ability. This is called the 
line of effect. If you need to check whether you have a line 
of effect, draw a line like you do when determining cover 
(see page 314). Only solid barriers break line of effect. Fog 
doesn't matter for line of effect, nor do portcullises and 
other barriers that aren't totally solid. If you're unsure 
whether a barrier is solid enough, usually a 1-foot-square 
gap is enough to maintain a line of effect, though the GM 
makes the final call. 
AURA
CONEBURSTLINE5 feetM10 feet5 feetL10 feet5 feet10 feet15 feet20 feet30 feet15-foot diagonal30-foot diagonal15-foot orthogonal30-foot orthogonal60-foot diagonal60-foot orthogonal30-foot lines60-foot linesMLMMMMMMAREASMedium orSmaller Creature
MLarge Creature
L299 Line of effect also applies to areas. If there's no line of 
effect between the origin of the area and the target, the 
target is unaffected by the spell. For example, if there's a 
solid wall between the origin of a fireball and a creature 
that's within the burst radius, that creature doesn't need 
to attempt a save against the fireball and is unaffected by 
it. Likewise, any ongoing effects created by an area cease 
to affect anyone who moves outside of the line of effect. AREAS
An area effect always has a point of origin, and it extends 
out from that origin. There are four types of areas: auras, 
bursts, cones, and lines. When you are playing in encounter 
mode and using a grid, areas are measured in the same way 
as movement, but areas' movements and effects are never 
reduced or affected by difficult terrain (see page 312) or 
screening (see page 314). You can use the area diagrams 
on page 298 as common reference templates, rather than 
measuring every square each time. Aura
An aura issues forth from each side of your space, 
emanating out to a specified number of feet in all directions. 
For instance, the bless spell's aura radiates 30 feet from the 
caster. Because the sides of a target's space are used as the 
starting point for the aura, a Large or larger creature's aura 
affects a greater overall area than that of a Medium or 
smaller creature. The rules for cover apply to auras (see page 314); an 
aura does not need line of effect to a target, but it must 
not be entirely cut off from the target (an aura in a lead 
box would not extend outside the box). Some auras are 
active for a duration, meaning you can potentially move 
while the aura is active; in this case, the aura moves with 
you as you move. Burst
A burst issues forth in all directions from a single corner of 
a square, spreading in all directions for a specified radius. 
For instance, when you cast fireball, it detonates in a 20-foot burst, meaning it extends out 20 feet in every direction 
from the corner of the square you chose, affecting each 
creature whose square the burst overlaps. A burst follows 
the same restrictions as an aura regarding cover or having 
line of effect. ConeA cone shoots out from you in a quarter circle on the grid. 
When you aim a cone, the first square of that cone must 
share an with edge your square, or it must touch a corner 
of your space if you are aiming diagonally. If you're Large 
or larger, it can run along the edge of any square of your 
space. You can't aim a cone so that it overlaps your space. 
The cone extends out for a number of feet, widening out as 
it goes, as shown in the Areas diagram. For instance, when 
a green dragon uses its breath weapon, it breathes a cone 
of poisonous gas that originates at the edge of its square 
and affects a quarter-circle area 30 feet on each edge.
If you make a cone originate from someone or something 
else, follow these same rules, using that creature or object's 
space instead of your own. 
LineA line shoots forth in a 5-foot-wide (or sometimes 10-foot-wide) line from a creature, in a direction of the creature's 
choosing. The line affects each creature whose square it 
overlaps. For example, the 
lightning bolt spell's area is a 
60-foot line. GAME CONVENTIONSWhen adjudicating rules, apply these general guidelines. 
Exceptions to these appear in rules where necessary, and if 
you're ever uncertain how to apply a rule, the GM decides. 
SPECIFIC OVERRIDES GENERAL
One of the core tenets of Pathfinder is that specific rules 
override general ones. If two rules conflict, the more 
specific one takes precedence. If there's still ambiguity, 
the GM determines which rule to use. For example, when 
attacking a concealed creature you must attempt a flat 
check against DC 5, and flat checks never have modifiers, 
bonuses, or penalties, but an ability specifically designed 
to overcome concealment might still alter your odds. 
ROUNDING
You'll often need to calculate a fraction of a value—most 
often halving damage or calculating a fraction of a cost 
when crafting. Always round down when you halve or 
create a fraction or percentage of something. For example, 
if a spell deals 7 damage and someone takes half damage 
from it, they would take 3 damage. 
MULTIPLYING
When more than one effect would multiply the same 
number, you don't multiply more than once. Instead, you 
combine all the multipliers into a single multiplier, with 
each multiple after the first adding 1 less than its value. For 
instance, if one ability doubled the duration of one of your 
spells and another one doubled the duration of the same 
spell, you would triple the duration, not quadruple it. 
DUPLICATE EFFECTS
When you're affected by the same thing multiple times, 
only one instance applies, using the higher level of the 
effects, or the newer effect if the two are equivalent in 
level. For example, if you were under the effect of a 
mage 
armor spell and then cast it again, you'd still be under the 
effect of only one casting of mage armor. Casting a spell 
again on the same target might extend the duration (per 
the spell's description) or give you a better bonus if it were 
cast at a higher level the second time, but otherwise doing 
so gives you no advantage.300 HERO POINTS
Your character earns Hero Points for performing heroic 
deeds or tasks and can spend these Hero Points to gain 
certain benefits. Your character starts each game session 
with 1 Hero Point. The GM can award Hero Points when 
PCs perform further heroic deeds or tasks, or when players 
do something special for the group. For the characters' 
actions, this all comes from the story. A character 
needs to do something selfless or daring beyond normal 
expectations. Players add Hero Points by taking on at least 
one additional responsibility, such as bringing food for the 
group, keeping a map of a dungeon, or taking notes. 
Each game session, the GM should award no more than 
1 Hero Point per PC for in-game actions plus 1 Hero Point 
per PC for out-of-game actions. This number can be higher 
for game sessions longer than 4 hours. Your character can have a maximum of 3 Hero Points 
at a given time. These points can't be saved up over the 
course of multiple sessions; at the end of each game 
session, your character loses all Hero Points. 
SPENDING HERO POINTS
Spending Hero Points doesn't require your character to 
take an action, a reaction, or a free action.
Ł Spending 1 Hero Point 
allows you to stave off death. 
Anytime you gain the dying condition or your dying 
condition increases in severity (see page 296), you can 
spend 1 Hero Point to lose the dying condition entirely, 
even if the increase in the dying condition would otherwise 
cause you to
 die. If you have 0 Hit Points, you also go to 
1 Hit Point.

Ł Spending 2 Hero Points
 allows you to reroll a d20 roll. You 
must use the second result, but if you fail, you regain 1 of 
the Hero Points you just spent. You can't spend Hero Points 
more than once on a single roll. This is a fortune Effect.

Ł Spending 3 Hero Points
 allows you to act one extra time in 
an encounter. You can spend the Hero Points on your turn 
to increase your number of actions for the turn by 1. To take 
an extra reaction when you've already used your reaction 
for the round, you spend these Hero Points when the trigger 
for that reaction occurs. You can't spend Hero Points to use 
additional actions or reactions if you can't act.
DESCRIBING HEROIC DEEDS
Because spending Hero Points reflects heroic deeds or 
tasks that surpass normal expectations, if you spend a 
Hero Point, you should describe the deed or task your 
character accomplishes with it to the other players. Your character's deed might involve a lesson learned in 
a past adventure, could be spurred on by a determination 
to save someone else in the encounter, or might depend on 
an item that ended up on their person due to a previous 
exploit or social interaction. If you don't want to describe 
the deed or don't have any strong ideas about how to do 
so, ask the GM to come up with something for you. This 
can be a collaborative process, too. The GM might remind 
you of a long-forgotten event in the campaign, then have 
you fill in how that comes back just at the right time.301 Your Perception measures your ability to notice things, 
search for what's hidden, and tell whether something 
about a situation is "off." This statistic is frequently used for rolling initiative to determine who goes first in an 
encounter, and for the Seek action.
You have a Perception modifier based on your Wisdom. 
Your class determines your proficiency in Perception. 
Perception modifier = Wisdom modifier
 + 
Perception proficiency modifier + circumstance bonus + 
conditional bonus + item bonus + circumstance penalty + 
conditional penalty + item penalty + untyped penalties 
In many circumstances, such as when someone's 
trying to sneak past you, the GM will roll against your 
Perception DC. Much like skill DCs, your Perception DC 
is 10 plus your Perception modifier.
LIGHTThe amount of light can affect how well you see things. 
There are three levels of light: bright light, dim light, and 
darkness. The rules in this book are presented assuming 
all creatures are in bright light. BRIGHT
 LIGHT
 In bright light, creatures and objects can be seen clearly by anyone with normal vision or better. Some types of 
creatures are dazzled or blinded by bright light. DIM
 LIGHT
Areas in shadow or lit by weak light sources are in dim light. 
Creatures and objects in dim light are concealed (see page 
302) to creatures that don't have blindsense, blindsight, 
darkvision, or low-light vision (see Special Senses below).DARKNESS
A creature or object within darkness is considered unseen (see page 303) to those without blindsense, blindsight, or darkvision (see Special Senses below). A creature without these senses is blinded (see page 320) while in darkness, though it might be able to see lit areas beyond the darkness. If a creature can see into a lit area, it can target creatures within that lit area, but it treats such targets as 
concealed (see page 302).SENSESThe ways a creature can use Perception depend on its senses. 
PRECISE AND IMPRECISE SENSES
A typical character has two prominent senses: vision and 
hearing. Vision is a precise sense: a sense that can be used 
to perceive the world in nuanced detail. The only way to 
target a creature without having drawbacks is to use a 
precise sense. You can usually see a creature automatically 
with a precise sense unless that creature is hiding or 
obscured by the environment, in which case you have to 
use the Seek action (see page 308) to detect the creature. Hearing is an imprecise sense—it isn't sufficient to 
make out the full range of detail that a precise sense can. You can usually sense (see Sensed on page 303) a creature 
automatically with an imprecise sense, unless it's using 
Stealth or in an environment that distorts the sense, such as a noisy room in the case of hearing. In those cases, you have to use the Seek action (see page 308) to detect the creature. At best, an imprecise sense can give a creature the sensed condition—it can't make the creature seen.
Pathfinder's rules assume that a given creature has vision 
as its only precise sense and hearing as its only imprecise sense. Other senses, such as smell, are insufficient to enable a creature to sense another in most circumstances. Some creatures, however, have precise or imprecise 
senses that don't match this assumption. For instance, an 
animal with the scent ability can use its sense of smell as 
an imprecise sense. A creature with poor vision might treat 
that sense as imprecise, while a creature with echolocation 
or a similar ability can use hearing as a precise sense. Such 
senses are often given special names. Poor vision might 
be listed as "imprecise vision," while a specialized precise 
sense might appear as "echolocation" or the like. 
SPECIAL SENSES
While a human might have a difficult time making out 
creatures in dim light, an elf can see those creatures just 
fine. And though elves have no problem seeing on a 
moonlit night, their vision cannot penetrate complete 
darkness, whereas a dwarf's can. 
Special senses grant greater awareness that allows 
creatures with these senses to either ignore or reduce the 
effects of the unseen, sensed, or concealed conditions 
(described in Detecting Creatures on page 302) when it 
comes to situations that foil normal vision. BlindsenseBlindsense is an imprecise sense with which a creature 
can detect things it can't see, out to a specified range. 
Every version of blindsense uses a particular nonvisual 
sense. A dragon might use its exceptional scent to smell 
intruders, while an undead might detect a creature's 
life force or hear heartbeats. Against a creature taking 
precautions to avoid visual detection, a creature with 
blindsense treats sensed creatures as if they were 
concealed, and treats unseen creatures as if they were 
sensed. This applies only within the range of the 
creature's blindsense.
BlindsightBlindsight is a precise sense other than vision, such as 
echolocation, that a creature can use to perceive details in a 
same way a human uses vision, out to a specified range. As 
PERCEPTION302with blindsense, every version of blindsight is a particular 
nonvisual sense. Against a creature taking precautions 
to avoid visual detection, creatures with blindsight treat 
unseen creatures as if they were concealed, and concealed 
or sensed creatures as if they were seen. This applies only 
within the range of the creature's blindsight. 
Darkvision
A creature with darkvision can see perfectly well in areas of darkness and dim light, though such vision is in black and white only. Some forms of magical darkness, such 
as a 4th-level darkness spell, block darkvision. However, 
a creature with greater darkvision can see through even these forms of magical darkness. Low-Light Vision
A creature with low-light vision does not treat creatures 
or objects within dim light as concealed. 
ScentScent involves sensing creatures or objects by smell. It 
is an imprecise sense within its range, but it functions only if the creature or object being detected emits an aroma (for instance, incorporeal creatures usually do not 
exude an aroma). If a creature emits a heavy aroma or is upwind, the GM can double or even triple the range of scent abilities used to detect that creature, and the 
GM can reduce the range if a creature is downwind. In essence, scent is equivalent to blindsense via scent. Tremorsense
Tremorsense allows a creature to feel the vibrations 
caused by movement through a solid surface. It is an 
imprecise sense within its range, but it functions only if both the detecting and the target creatures are on or 
in the same surface and the target creatures are moving 
along (or burrowing through) it. In essence, tremorsense is equivalent to blindsense via detecting tremors. DETECTING CREATURES
There are four states that measure the degree to which 
you can sense a creature: seen, concealed, sensed, and unseen. When you're trying to target a creature that's 
harder to see or otherwise sense, various drawbacks apply. Most of these rules apply to objects you're trying 
to detect as well as creatures. Typically, the GM tracks how well creatures can detect 
one another, since neither party has perfect information. 
For example, you might think a creature is in the last place you sensed it, but it was actually able to Sneak away. Or you might think a creature can't see you in the 
darkness, but it has darkvision. You can attempt to avoid detection by using the 
Stealth skill to Hide or Sneak (see page 158) or by using Deception to Create a Diversion (see page 148).SEEN
In most circumstances, you can see creatures without 
difficulty and target them normally, but various 
situations might make targeting more difficult. If you 
can't, you'll need to factor in the targeting restrictions 
that follow. See the Detecting with Other Senses sidebar 
for advice regarding creatures that don't use sight as 
their primary sense. 
CONCEALED
A creature is concealed from you if it's in mist, within dim 
light, or amid something else that obscures sight but does 
not provide a physical barrier to effects. An effect or type 
of terrain that describes an area of concealment makes all 
creatures within it concealed. When you target a creature that's concealed from 
you, before you roll to determine your effect, you 
must attempt a DC 5 flat check. If you fail that check, 
you don't affect the target. Sometimes the level of 
concealment is so great that a creature is considered 
merely sensed instead of seen and concealed. DETECTING WITH OTHER SENSES
If a monster uses a sense other than vision as a precise sense, the 
GM can adapt the system for detecting creatures to equivalents 
that work with those senses. For example, a creature that has 
echolocation might use hearing as a primary sense, treating 
creatures as "heard" if it can directly hear them, concealed if 
they're in a noisy chamber, sensed if it has located them, and 
"unheard" if it can't hear their location at all. Many abilities 
that apply when a creature is unseen would still apply if it were 
unheard, though the GM might determine ones that are explicitly 
visual in nature don't.
USING STEALTH WITH OTHER SENSES
 The Stealth skill is designed to use Hide for avoiding visual 
detection and Sneak to avoid being heard. For many special 
senses, a player can describe how they're avoiding detection by 
a special sense and use the most applicable Stealth action. For 
instance, a creature stepping lightly to avoid being detected via 
tremorsense would be using Sneak. A character using Stealth 
in this way overrides the usual rules by which special senses 
detect creatures. For instance, when you successfully Hide from a 
creature with blindsight, it treats you as sensed as normal for the 
Hide action instead of treating you as seen as it normally does for 
sensed creatures.
In some cases, rolling a Dexterity-based Stealth skill check 
doesn't make the most sense. For example, when facing a monster 
that can detect heartbeats, to avoid being detected a PC might 
need to meditate to slow their heart rate, using Wisdom instead 
of Dexterity as the ability modifier for the Stealth check. When 
going up against multiple senses, such as if the monster could also hear or see, the PC would use the lowest applicable ability 
modifier for her check.303 SENSED
A creature that's sensed is only barely perceptible. You 
know what space the sensed creature occupies, but little else. Perhaps the creature just moved behind cover and successfully used the Hide action. Maybe you've been blinded or the creature is under the effects of invisibility, but you used Seek to determine its general location based on hearing alone. Your target might be in a deep fogbank 
or behind a waterfall, where you can see some movement but can't determine an exact location.
When targeting a creature that you sense, before you 
roll to determine your effect, you must attempt a DC 11 
flat check. If you fail that check, you don't affect the 
target. You're still flat-footed to the creature whether you 
successfully target it or not. UNSEEN
If a creature is unseen, you have no idea where it is. You 
don't know what space it occupies, you're flat-footed to 
it, and you can't easily target it with attacks or targeted 
spells and affects. Using the Seek action can help you detect an unseen creature, usually making it sensed. Targeting an unseen creature is difficult. However, if 
you suspect there's a creature around, you can pick a 
square and attempt an attack. This works like targeting a sensed creature, but the flat check and attack roll are rolled in secret by the GM. The GM won't tell you if you 
missed due to failing the flat check, rolling an insufficient attack roll, or choosing the wrong square. For instance, suppose an enemy elf wizard became 
invisible and then Sneaked away. You suspect that with the 
elf's Speed of 30 feet, he probably moved 15 feet toward an 
open door. You move up and attack a space 15 feet from 
where the elf started and directly on the path to the door. 
The GM secretly rolls an attack roll and flat check, but she 
knows that you were not quite correct—the elf was actually 
in the adjacent space! She tells you that you missed, so you 
decide to make your next attack on the adjacent space, just 
in case. This time, it's the right space and the GM's secret 
attack roll and flat check both succeed, so you hit!
INVISIBLE
A creature that's invisible (by way of the 
invisibility spell, 
a ring of invisibility, or some other magic item, spell effect, 
or special ability) is automatically unseen to everyone. 
You can use the Seek action to attempt to detect an 
invisible creature, making it sensed to you on a successful 
Perception check. This lasts until the invisible creature uses 
Sneak to become unseen again. If the creature becomes 
invisible while seen by you, it starts out sensed, since you 
know where it was when it became invisible, though it can 
proceed to Sneak after becoming invisible to become unseen.
Other effects might make an invisible creature sensed or even concealed. For instance, if you were tracking an invisible creature's footprints through the snow, the 
footprints would make it sensed, and throwing a net over 
an invisible creature would make it concealed for as long as the net is on the creature.304 When every action counts, you enter the encounter mode 
of play. In this mode, you have turns during which you use 
actions. Your turn in sequence with everybody else's turns 
makes up a round. A round is 6 seconds of time in the 
game world. Depending on the details of the encounter, 
you may have the opportunity to use reactions and free 
actions, both on your turn and on others' turns. STRUCTURE
An encounter is played out in a series of encounter 
rounds, during which characters act in sequence. You roll 
a special kind of check to determine this order at the start 
of the encounter and then play through a series of rounds 
until a conclusion is reached and the encounter ends. An 
encounter is structured as follows. STEP 1: 
ROLL INITIATIVE
When the GM calls for it, you'll roll initiative to determine 
your place in the initiative order, which is the sequence in 
which the characters will take their turns. This roll marks 
the start of an encounter. More often than not, you'll roll 
initiative when you enter a battle, which is often called a 
combat encounter. As a default assumption, these rules 
are written for that type of encounter. 
Typically, you'll roll a Perception check to determine your 
initiative. The more aware you are of your surroundings, 
the more quickly you can respond. Sometimes the GM 
might call on you to make some other type of check for 
the initiative check. For instance, if you were Sneaking 
during exploration (see page 317), you'd roll a Stealth 
check instead. Alternatively, a social encounter could call 
for a Deception or Diplomacy check. If you are about to 
start a wrestling match, the GM might ask how you want 
to play the opening move in the competition and decide 
based on your answer that your initiative roll should be 
an Athletics or Acrobatics check. 
The GM rolls initiative for any potential adversaries in the encounter. If the potential adversaries include a 
number of identical creatures, she could roll once for the group as a whole and have them take their turns within the group in any order she wishes. She could even change the initiative order within the group from round to round. The GM could also roll any or all creatures individually. 
Unlike a typical check, initiative rolls are ranked 
instead of being compared to a DC. This ranking sets 
the initiative order in which the encounter's participants 
act. The character with the highest result goes first. The 
second highest then follows, and so on until whoever 
rolled lowest takes their turn last. If your initiative roll result is tied with an opponent's 
result, that opponent goes first. If your initiative roll result 
is tied with another player character's result, you can 
decide between yourselves who goes first when you reach 
that place in the initiative order. Once you've resolved 
who goes first, your places in the initiative order usually 
don't change during the encounter.
STEP 2: PLAY A ROUND
A round begins when the participant with the highest 
initiative roll result starts their turn, and it ends when the 
one with the lowest initiative ends their turn. The process 
of taking a turn is detailed below. Creatures might also 
act outside of their turns by using certain reactions and 
free actions. 
STEP 3: BEGIN THE NEXT ROUND
Once everyone in the encounter has taken a turn, the round is over and the next one begins. Don't roll initiative 
again; the new round proceeds in the same order as the previous one, repeating the cycle until the encounter ends. 
STEP 4: END THE ENCOUNTER
When your foes are defeated, some sort of truce is reached, 
or some other event or circumstance ends the combat, the 
encounter is over. You and the other participants no longer 
need to follow the initiative order, and a more free-form 
style of play resumes, with the players typically moving 
into exploration mode (see page 316). Sometimes at the 
end of an encounter a GM will award Experience Points 
and treasure for the party to divvy up. 
TURNS
When it's your turn to act, you can use actions 
 and 
applicable activities, free actions , and reactions ; when you're finished, your turn ends and the character 
next in the initiative order begins their turn. Sometimes 
it's important to note in what point during your turn 
something happens, so a turn is divided into three steps.
STEP 1: START YOUR TURN
Many things happen automatically at the start of your 
turn, and it's also a common point for tracking the passage 
of time for effects that last multiple rounds. Take the following steps, plus do anything else that is 
specified to happen at the start of your turn, in any order 
you choose.
Ł If you created an Effect that lasts for a certain number of 
rounds, you reduce the number of rounds remaining. The 
Effect ends if the duration has expired. For example, if you 
cast a spell on yourself that lasts 3 rounds on your first turn 
of a fight, it would aflect you during that turn, decrease to 2 
rounds of duration at the start of your second turn, decrease 
to 1 round of duration at the start of your third turn, and 
expire at the start of your fourth turn.

Ł You can use free actions or reactions that have a trigger of 
"Your turn begins" or something similar.

Ł If you're dying or unconscious, attempt your recovery saving 
throw (see page 295).
The last step of starting your turn is always the same. ENCOUNTER MODE305
Ł Regain your 3 actions and 1 reaction. If you have not spent 
your actions or your reaction from your last turn, you lose 
them. You can't hold over actions or reactions from one 
turn to another turn. Some abilities or conditions (such as 
the quick and slowed conditions) can change how many 
actions you regain and whether you regain your reaction. 
If a condition prevents you from being able to act, you 
don't regain any actions or your reaction.
STEP 2: ACT
You can spend actions in any order you wish during your 
turn. What actions you can use often depend on your skills, feats, and items, but there are a number of default 
actions you can take, described under Basic Actions on page 307. Some effects will prevent you from acting. If you can't act, you can't use actions, activities, reactions, 
or free actions. During an encounter, successive actions must be spent 
within a single turn—if an activity requires 3 actions, you 
can't spend 2 actions in one turn and the third on your 
next turn. Once you have spent all 3 of your actions, your turn is 
over and the next creature's turn begins. You can always 
forgo using any remaining actions, and end your turn 
instead. As soon as your turn ends, you lose all your 
remaining actions. Multiple Attack Penalty
Attacks are particularly strenuous and become less and less effective the more you use them during a single turn. 
The second time you use an attack action (anything with the attack trait) during your turn, you take a –5 penalty to your attack roll. On your third attack (and any subsequent attacks if you have a way to take more) you take a –10 penalty. This penalty is called your multiple 
attack penalty. The multiple attack penalty applies only 
on your turn and resets at the end of your turn. Attacks you can make outside of your turn might include their own penalties. Activities in Encounters
Activities that take longer than a turn can't normally 
be performed during an encounter. Spells with a casting 
time of 1 minute or more are a common example of this, as are several skill activities. When you commit to an activity during your turn in an encounter, you commit 
to spending all of the actions it requires. If the activity gets interrupted partway through, you don't get any of 
the activity's actions back. Activities are described in full 
on page 296.
Reactions in Encounters
Your reactions let you respond to what's happening around 
you immediately. The GM determines whether you can use 
reactions before your first turn begins, depending on the 
situation in which the encounter happens. TRACKING INITIATIVE
The GM keeps track of the initiative order for an encounter. It's 
usually okay for the players to know this order, since they'll see 
who goes when and be aware of one another's results. However, 
the GM might want to conceal the names of adversaries the PCs 
have yet to identify.
Once the encounter's order is set, it's not necessary to track the 
original initiative numbers. The GM can create a simple list, use a 
series of cards or other markers, or use a 
Pathfinder Combat Pad, which has magnetic markers to allow for easily rearranging the 
initiative order.
CHANGING THE INITIATIVE ORDER
Any method used to track the initiative order needs to be fiexible, 
because the order can change during the encounter. A creature 
can Delay to change its place in the order (see page 307), in which 
case you can erase it from the list or pull its marker aside until it 
reenters the initiative order. It can Ready (see page 308) to use 
an action that's activated by a trigger but that does not change its 
place in the order. When a creature gets knocked out, its initiative 
order changes automatically (see page 295).
STRIDING AND STRIKING 
Two of the simplest actions you'll commonly use during your turn 
in combat are Stride and Strike (see page 308).
Stride is an action with the move trait that allows you to move 
up to your Speed in feet. You'll often need to Stride multiple times 
to reach a foe who's far away or to run from danger! Reactions 
in the game are often triggered by move actions. Unlike other 
actions, however, a move action can trigger reactions and free 
actions not only when you start, but also every 5 feet you move 
during that action or reaction. The Step action (see page 308) lets 
you move 5 feet without triggering reactions.
Strike is an action with the attack trait that allows you to 
attack with a weapon you're wielding or an unarmed attack (such 
as with a fist).You have to attack a creature within your reach if you're using 
a melee weapon or unarmed attack, or attack a creature within 
range if you're attacking with a ranged weapon. Your reach is 
how far you can physically extend a part of your body to make 
an unarmed attack or the farthest distance you can reach with 
a melee weapon. This is typically 5 feet, but special weapons 
and larger creatures have longer reaches. Your range is how far 
away you can attack with a ranged weapon or with some form 
of magical attack. Different weapons and magical attacks have 
different maximum ranges, and they get less Effective if you 
exceed their range increments.
Striking multiple times has diminishing returns. The multiple 
attack penalty applies to attacks after the first, whether those 
attacks are Strikes, special attacks like the grapple use of the 
Athletics skill, or attacks from spells.
306 Once your first turn begins and you gain your actions and reaction, you can use 1 reaction per round anytime it's triggered. Reactions can be used on anyone's turn 
(including your own) but only when a trigger is satisfied. If you don't use your reaction, you lose it at the start of 
your next turn, though you typically gain a reaction at the start of that turn. Some reactions are specifically meant to be used in combat, and can change how the battle plays out 
drastically! One example of a reaction is Attack of Opportunity, which fighters receive at 1st level.
 ATTACK OF OPPORTUNITY
Trigger
 A creature within your reach uses a 
manipulate action or a move action, makes a ranged attack, or 
leaves a square during a move action it's using.
Make a melee Strike against the triggering creature at a 
–2 penalty. If the attack hits and the trigger was a manipulate 
action, you disrupt that action. This Strike doesn't count toward 
your multiple attack penalty, and your multiple attack penalty 
doesn't apply to it.
This reaction allows you to make a melee Strike if a 
creature within reach uses a manipulate action, uses a move action, makes a ranged attack, or leaves a square during a move action it's using. The Triggering Moves 
diagram above illustrates examples of movements that might trigger an Attack of Opportunity from a creature without reach and one with reach. FighterYou'll notice this reaction allows you to use a modified 
basic action, a Strike. This follows the rules on dependent abilities found on page 296. Because an Attack of Opportunity is a quick and opportunistic Strike, you take a –2 penalty when using it, and even though it is an attack action, it doesn't incur a multiple attack penalty to 
the attack roll. 
STEP 3: END YOUR TURN
Once you've done all the things you want to do with 
your actions, you reach the end of your turn. Take the 
following steps, plus resolve anything else specified 
to happen at the end of your turn, in any order you 
choose. You then pass play to the next character in the 
initiative order.

Ł End any Effects that last until the end of your turn. For 
example, spells with a duration of concentration end at the 
end of your turn unless you use the Concentrate on a Spell 
action during your turn to extend them. Some Effects caused 
by enemies might also last through a certain number of your 
turns, and you decrease the remaining duration or end them 
during this step.
Ł If you have a persistent damage condition, you take the 
damage at this point. You also attempt any saves for your 
afflictions at this time. Many other conditions change at the 
end of your turn, such as the frightened condition decreasing 
in severity.

Ł You can use free actions or reactions that have a trigger of 
"Your turn ends" or something similar.
TRIGGERING MOVES
1. Valeros can approach position 
1 with the Stride action without 
triggering reactions.
2. If Valeros approaches this way to 
position 2, he triggers reactions 
from both the hobgoblin and 
the troll. The troll has a reach 
of 10 feet, so Valeros triggers 
reactions from both enemies 
when he moves out of the second 
square and into the third.
3. If Seoni Strides to position 3, 
she triggers reactions from the 
hobgoblin and the troll. Because 
of its 10-foot reach, the troll 
could use its reaction when Seoni 
left either square. She could 
Step twice to get there to avoid 
triggering reactions, but that 
uses 2 actions instead of 1.213 Valeros
Seoni307
These basic functions of the game are available to all creatures, and are how the game represents common tasks like moving around, attacking, and helping others. Every creature can use basic actions, activities, free actions, and reactions except in some extreme circumstances, and 
many are used with great frequency. Most notably, you'll 
use Interact, Step, Stride, and Strike a great deal. Many feats and other actions call upon you to use one of these basic actions or modify them to produce different effects. For example, a more complex action might let you Stride 
up to double your Speed instead of just up to your Speed, and a large number of activities include a Strike. Actions that are used less frequently but are still 
open to most creatures are presented in Specialty Basic 
Actions and Reactions on page 309. These typically 
have requirements that characters are less likely to meet, 
such as wielding a shield or having a burrow Speed. If you can cast spells, the activities and actions for 
spellcasting can be found on pages 195–196, and if 
you have any magic items, the activities and actions for 
using those appear on page 376. AIDTrigger
 An ally is about to use an action, activity, free action, or 
reaction that requires a skill check.
Requirements
 The ally is willing to accept your aid, and you have 
prepared to help (see below). 
You try to aid your ally's check in some way. To use this reaction, 
you must first prepare to help, usually by using an action during 
your turn. You must explain to the GM exactly how you're trying 
to help, and she determines whether you can Aid your ally. 
When you use your Aid reaction, attempt a skill check of a 
type decided by the GM. The typical DC for Aid is 15, but at the 
GM's discretion this might change to DC 20 for particularly hard 
tasks or DC 10 for particularly easy tasks. The GM can add any relevant traits to your Aid reaction or to your preparatory action 
depending on the situation.
Success You grant your ally a +2 circumstance bonus to the 
triggering skill check. Critical Success You grant your ally a +4 circumstance bonus 
to the triggering skill check. Critical Failure
 Your ally takes a –2 circumstance penalty to 
the triggering skill check. ASSISTRequirements
 An enemy is within your melee 
reach, and is within the reach of one or more of your allies. 
You help an ally attack the enemy or foil the enemy's attacks 
against one of your allies. Choose one enemy you're adjacent 
to and one ally adjacent to that enemy. Then, attempt a melee 
attack against the enemy's AC.
Success The creature takes no damage. Instead, you either 
impose a –2 circumstance penalty to the enemy's attack 
Attack
rolls against your chosen ally, or you grant your chosen 
ally a +2 circumstance bonus to attack rolls against your 
chosen enemy. You choose which Effect you create. The 
penalty or bonus lasts until the start of your next turn.
Critical Success As a success, but the penalty is –4 or the bonus is +4.Critical Failure
 Your chosen enemy either gains a +2 
circumstance bonus to attack rolls against your chosen 
ally or your chosen ally takes a –2 penalty to attack rolls 
against the chosen enemy. Your chosen enemy decides 
which of these Effects occurs. The penalty or bonus lasts until the start of your next turn.
 CRAWL
Requirements
 You are prone and your Speed is at 
least 10 feet. You move 5 feet. 
 DELAY
Trigger
 Your turn begins.
You bide your time, waiting for the right moment to act. The rest 
of your turn doesn't happen yet. Instead, you're removed from 
the initiative order. You can return to the initiative order as a 
free action triggered by the end of any other creature's turn. This 
permanently changes your initiative to the new position. You 
can't use reactions until you return to the initiative order. If you 
Delay an entire round without returning to the initiative order, 
the actions from the Delayed turn are lost, your initiative doesn't 
change, and your next turn occurs at your original position in the 
initiative order.
When you Delay, any persistent damage or other negative 
effects that you would have normally taken at the start or end 
of your turn occur immediately when you use the Delay action. 
Any beneficial effects that would end at any point during your 
turn also end at this point. The GM might determine that other 
effects end when you Delay as well. Essentially, you can't 
Delay to avoid negative consequences that would happen on 
your turn or to extend beneficial effects that would end on 
your turn.
 DROPTrigger
 Your turn begins, your turn ends, or you 
start to use an action. You drop an item you're holding in your hand or hands. Unlike 
most manipulate actions, Drop does not trigger reactions such as 
Attack of Opportunity. 
 DROP PRONE
You fall prone.
 INTERACT
You use your hand or hands to manipulate 
an object or the terrain. You grab an unattended or stored 
object, open a door, or do some similar action. You may have 
to attempt a skill check to determine if your Interact action 
was successful.
Move
Manipulate
Move
Manipulate
BASIC ACTIONS
308 LEAPYou take a careful but short jump. You can Leap up 
to 10 feet horizontally if your Speed is at least 15 feet, or up to 
15 feet horizontally if your Speed is at least 30 feet. You land in 
the space where your Leap ends (meaning you can typically clear 
a 5-foot gap if your Speed is between 15 feet and 30 feet, or a 
10-foot gap if your Speed is 30 feet or more).
If you make a vertical Leap, you can move up to 3 feet 
vertically and 5 feet horizontally onto an elevated surface. 
Jumping a greater distance requires using the Athletics skill 
(see pages 146-147).
 READY
You prepare to use an action that will occur 
outside your turn. Choose a single action you can use and 
designate a trigger. Your turn then ends. If the trigger you 
choose occurs before the start of your next turn, you can use 
the chosen action as a reaction (provided you still meet the 
requirements to use it).
If you have a multiple attack penalty and your readied action 
is an attack action, your readied attack takes the multiple 
attack penalty as if you had spent your readied attack on your 
turn. This is one of the few times the multiple attack penalty 
applies when it's not your turn. For more information about 
multiple attack penalties, see page 305.
Move
Concentrate
 SEEK 
You scan an area for signs of unseen creatures 
or hidden objects. If you're scanning for signs of 
unseen creatures, choose either a 30-foot cone or a 15-foot burst 
within line of sight. The GM attempts a single secret Perception 
check (see page 293) for you and compares the result to the 
Stealth DCs of any unseen creatures within the area. If your result 
is greater than the Stealth DC of a creature, you sense the creature 
until it Sneaks (see page 158) or otherwise avoids your detection 
(see Senses on page 301).If you're using Seek to search for hidden objects such as secret 
doors or hazards, you search up to a 10-foot square adjacent to you. 
You may need to spend more than 1 Seek action for larger areas 
or if the area to be searched is cluttered. If your Perception check 
result equals or exceeds the DC of a hidden object (as determined 
by the GM or by the character Concealing the Object), you either 
learn its location or gain a clue as to its location (GM's choice).
 STAND
You stand up from prone. 
 STEPRequirements
 Your Speed is at least 10 feet.
You carefully move 5 feet. Unlike most types of movement, 
Stepping doesn't trigger reactions, such as Attacks of Opportunity, 
based on move actions or on leaving or entering a square. You can't 
Step into diflcult terrain or greater diflcult terrain (see page 312).
 STRIDE 
Move up to your Speed (see page 310).
 STRIKEYou attack with a weapon you're wielding or with 
an unarmed attack, targeting one creature within your reach 
(for a melee attack) or within range (for a ranged attack). Roll 
the attack roll for the weapon or unarmed attack you are using 
and compare the result to the target creature's AC to determine 
the Effect. See Melee Strikes and Ranged Strikes on page 17 for details on calculating your attack and damage rolls.
Success You deal damage according to the weapon or unarmed 
attack, including any circumstance and conditional bonuses 
and penalties. Critical Success You critically succeed at an attack roll, dealing 
double damage. See the Critical Hit Damage sidebar above 
for more information.
 TAKE COVER
Requirements
 You are benefiting from cover or are near a feature 
that allows you to take cover.
You press yourself against a wall or duck behind an obstacle to 
take better advantage of cover (see Cover on page 314). If you 
would gain a +2 circumstance bonus to AC and Reflex saves 
due to cover, you instead gain a +4 circumstance bonus to AC 
and Reflex saves from the cover while you're taking cover. 
Otherwise, you gain the normal benefits of cover. This lasts until 
you move from your current space, use an attack action, become 
Concentrate
Secret
Move
Move
Move
Attack
SPEAKINGAs long as you can act, you can also speak. You don't need to 
spend any type of action, reaction, or free action to speak, but 
because a round represents 6 seconds of time, you can usually 
speak at most a single sentence or so per round.
Special uses of speech, such as attempting a Deception skill 
check to Lie or providing a Verbal casting action, can require 
spending actions and follow their own rules. All speech has 
the auditory trait. If you communicate in some way other than 
speech, other rules might apply. For instance, using sign language 
is visual instead of auditory.
CRITICAL HIT DAMAGE
When you double the damage on a critical success with a 
Strike, or with any other action or activity that multiplies 
damage, use the following rules to determine which values 
you multiply.

Ł Roll double the usual number of damage dice for your 
weapon or unarmed attack.

Ł Add double your ability modifier to damage, if one applies.

Ł Add double any circumstance and conditional bonuses and 
penalties to damage.
Ł Don't double extra damage that occurs only on a critical hit, 
such as the damage from the deadly weapon trait.
309unconscious, or end this Effect as a free action triggered by the 
start or end of your turn.
SPECIALTY BASIC ACTIONS AND REACTIONS
These actions and reactions are useful only under specific 
circumstances. Some require you to have a special 
movement type, as detailed on page 310. ARREST A FALL
Trigger
 You fall.
Requirements
 You have a fiy Speed.
You attempt an Acrobatics check to slow your fall (see Falling on 
page 310). The DC is typically 15, but it might be higher due to air turbulence or other circumstances.
Success You fall gently, taking no damage from the fall.
  BREATHE DEEP
You take a deep breath. If you go without air at any 
point before the start of your next turn, you can use twice as many 
actions before you start suflocating (see page 315).
 BURROW
Requirements
 You have a burrow Speed.
You dig your way through dirt, sand, or a similar loose material 
at a rate up to your burrow Speed. You can't burrow through rock 
or other substances denser than dirt unless you have an ability 
that allows you to do so.
 FLY
Requirements
 You have a fiy Speed.
You move through the air up to your fiy Speed. Moving upward 
(straight up or diagonally) counts as traveling through diflcult 
terrain. You can move straight down 10 feet for every 5 feet of 
movement you spend. If you fiy to the ground, you don't take falling 
damage. You can use an action to Fly 0 feet to hover in place.
If you're airborne at the end of your turn and didn't use a Fly 
action this round, you fall. 
 MOUNTRequirements
 You are adjacent to an allied animal 
companion or to a creature at least one size larger than you 
that you've controlled using the Handle an Animal action (see 
page 153).You move onto the controlled creature and ride it. If you're 
already mounted, you can instead use this action to dismount, 
moving off the mount into a space adjacent to it.
 POINT OUT 
Requirements
 A creature is not unseen by you, but 
it is unseen by one or more of your allies.
You indicate a creature that you can see to one or more allies, 
gesturing in a direction and describing the distance verbally. Allies 
treat that creature as sensed rather than unseen (see page 303). 
This works only for allies who can see you and are in a position 
where they could potentially sense the target. If your allies can't 
hear or understand you, they must succeed at a Perception check 
Concentrate
Move
Move
Move
Manipulate
Visualagainst the creature's Stealth DC or they misunderstand the 
distance to the target and believe it to be in a different location. 
 RAISE A SHIELD
Requirements
 You are wielding a shield. 
You position your shield to protect yourself. When you have 
Raised a Shield, you gain its listed bonuses to AC and TAC as 
circumstance bonuses and you can use the Shield Block reaction. 
Your shield remains raised until the start of your next turn.
 SHIELD BLOCK
Trigger
 While you have your shield raised, you take damage from 
a physical attack.
You snap your shield into place to defiect a blow. Your shield 
prevents you from taking an amount of damage up to its Hardness—
the shield takes this damage instead, possibly becoming dented or 
broken. See page 175 for rules on dented and broken items.
310 Whether across the battlefield, through crowded city 
streets, or along the corridors of a dangerous dungeon, 
your movement and position determine how you can 
interact with the world. Moving around in exploration 
and downtime modes is relatively fluid and free-form. 
Movement in encounter mode, in contrast, is rigid and 
governed by a number of rules explained in Movement in 
Encounter Mode (see page 311). 
MOVEMENT TYPES
Creatures in Pathfinder have a variety of ways to move 
around, from dashing across the ground and soaring 
through the clouds to knifing through swift ocean currents, 
scaling sheer cliff sides, and even tunneling underfoot. SPEED
The Speed statistic—also called land Speed—that most 
player characters and monsters have indicates how far 
they can move across the ground. When you use the 
Stride action, you move a number of feet equal to your 
Speed. Numerous other abilities allow you to move, from 
Crawling to Leaping, and most of them are based on your 
Speed in some way. Whenever a rule mentions your Speed 
without specifying a type, it's referring to your land Speed.
OTHER MOVEMENT TYPES
Some abilities give you different ways to move, such 
as through the air or underground. Each of these 
special movement types has its own Speed value. Many 
creatures have these Speeds naturally. The various types 
of movement are listed below. Since the Stride action can 
be used only with your normal Speed, moving using one 
of these movement types requires using a special action, 
and you can't Step while using one of these movement 
types. Since Speed by itself refers to your land Speed, rules 
text concerning these special movement types specifies the 
movement types to which it applies. Switching from one movement type to another requires 
ending your movement in the first type and using a new 
action in the second. For instance, if you Climbed 10 feet 
to the top of a cliff, you could then Stride forward 10 feet. Burrow Speed
A burrow Speed lets you tunnel through the ground. You 
can use the Burrow action (see page 309) if you have a 
burrow Speed. Burrowing doesn't normally leave behind 
a tunnel unless the ability specifically states that it does. Climb SpeedA climb Speed allows you to climb up or down inclines 
and vertical surfaces. Instead of needing to roll Athletics 
checks to Climb, you automatically succeed and move up 
to your climb Speed instead of the listed distance. 
You might still have to attempt Athletics checks to Climb 
in hazardous conditions, to Climb extremely difficult 
surfaces, or to cross horizontal planes such as ceilings. You 
can also choose to roll an Athletics check to Climb rather 
than accept an automatic success. Your climb Speed grants 
you a +4 circumstance bonus to Athletics checks to Climb. You're not flat-footed while climbing if you have a 
climb Speed. Fly Speed
As long as you have a fly Speed, you can use the Fly and Arrest a Fall actions (see page 309). You can also attempt 
to Maneuver in Flight if you're trained in the Acrobatics skill (see page 145).Wind conditions can affect how you Fly. In general, 
moving against the wind counts as moving through 
difficult terrain (or greater difficult terrain if you're also 
flying upward) and moving with the wind allows you to 
move 10 feet for every 5 feet of movement you spend (not 
cumulative with moving straight downward). For more 
information on spending movement, see Movement in 
Encounter Mode on page 311.Upward and downward movement are relative to 
the gravity in your area; if you're Flying in a place 
without gravity, moving up or down is no different 
from moving horizontally.
Swim SpeedWith a swim Speed, you can propel yourself through the 
water with little impediment. Instead of rolling Athletics 
checks to Swim, you automatically succeed and move up 
to your swim Speed instead of the listed distance. You still 
treat moving up or down as difficult terrain. You might still have to attempt checks in hazardous 
conditions or to cross turbulent water. You can also 
choose to roll an Athletics check to Swim rather than 
accept an automatic success. Your swim Speed grants you 
a +4 circumstance bonus to Athletics checks to Swim. Having a swim Speed doesn't necessarily mean you 
can breathe in water, so you might still have to hold your 
breath if you're underwater (see page 315).FALLING
When you fall more than 5 feet, you take bludgeoning 
damage when you land equal to half the distance you fell. 
Treat falls longer than 1,500 feet as though they were 
1,500 feet (750 damage). If you take any damage from a 
fall, you're knocked prone when you land. You can Grab an Edge as a reaction using the Acrobatics 
skill (see page 144) to reduce the damage from some 
falls. In addition, if you fall into water, snow, or another 
relatively soft substance, you can treat the fall as though it 
were 20 feet shorter, or 30 feet shorter if you intentionally 
dove in. The effective reduction can't be greater than the 
depth (so when falling into 10-foot-deep water, you treat 
the fall as 10 feet shorter).MOVEMENT AND POSITION
311 FALLING ON A CREATURE
If you land on a creature, that creature must attempt a 
DC 15 Reflex save. On a success, it takes bludgeoning 
damage equal to one-quarter the falling damage you took, 
on a critical success it takes no damage, on a failure it takes 
bludgeoning damage equal to half the falling damage you 
took, and on a critical failure it takes the same amount of 
falling damage you took. 
FALLING OBJECTS
A dropped object takes damage just like a falling creature. 
If it lands on a creature, that creature can attempt a 
Reflex save using the same rules as a creature falling on a 
creature. Hazards and spells that involve falling objects, 
such as a rockslide, have their own rules about how they 
interact with creatures and the damage they deal. FORCED MOVEMENT
When an effect forces you to move or if you start falling, 
that movement is defined by the effect that moved you, 
not by your Speed. Because you're not acting to move, this 
doesn't trigger reactions that are triggered by movement.
MOVEMENT IN ENCOUNTER MODE
Your movement during encounter mode depends on the 
actions and other abilities you use. Whether you Stride or Step, Swim or Climb, the maximum distance you can move is based on your Speed. Certain feats or magic items can grant you other movement types, allowing you to swiftly burrow, climb, fly, or swim (see page 310).
When the rules refer to a 
movement cost or spending 
movement, they are referring to how many feet of your 
Speed it costs to move from one point to another. Normally, 
movement costs 5 feet per square when you're moving on 
a battle grid, or it costs the number of feet you move if 
you're not using a grid. However, sometimes it's harder 
to move a certain distance due to difficult terrain (see 
page 312) or other factors. In such a case, you might have 
to spend a different amount of movement to move from 
one place to another. For example, a form of movement 
might require you to spend 10 feet of movement to move 
1 square, and moving through some types of terrain costs 
an extra 5 feet of movement per square. 
GRID MOVEMENT
If an encounter involves combat, it's often a good idea 
to track the movement and relative position of the participants using a Pathfinder Flip-Mat or some other form of grid to display the terrain, and miniatures to represent the combatants. When a character moves on a grid, every 1-inch square of the play area is 5 feet across in the game world. Hence, a creature moving in a straight line spends 5 feet of its movement for every 
square traveled. Because moving through spaces on a diagonal covers 
more ground, count that movement differently. The first 
square of diagonal movement you make in a turn counts as 5 feet, but the second counts as 10 feet, and your count alternates between the two. For example, as you move across 4 squares diagonally, you would count 5 feet, then 
10, then 5, and then 10, for a total of 30 feet. You need 
to track your total diagonal movement across all your movement during your turn, but you reset your count at the end of your turn. MOVE
 TRIGGERS
Some reactions and free actions are triggered by a 
creature using an action or ability with the move trait 
(also known as move actions and move abilities). The 
most common is Attack of Opportunity (see page 306), 
which allows a creature to Strike a moving foe. Actions 
or abilities with the move trait can trigger reactions 
or free actions throughout the course of the distance 
traveled (although no more than once for a given 
creature). Each time you exit a square (or move 5 feet, 
if you aren't using a grid to track movement) that is 
within a creature's reach, your movement triggers those 
reactions and free actions. If you use a move action or 
move ability but don't move into another square (or you 
move less than 5 feet, if not using a grid), the trigger 
happens at the end of that action or ability instead. Some exceptions, such as Step, don't trigger reactions 
or free actions based on movement. 
MOVING THROUGH A CREATURE'S SPACE
You can move through a willing creature's space. If you 
want to move through an unwilling creature's space, you 
have to either attempt an Athletics check to Shove it out of the way or Tumble Through that creature's space using 
the Acrobatics skill. You can't end your movement in a 
square occupied by another creature, though you can end 
a move action in its square provided you immediately use another move action to leave that square. If two creatures end up in the same square by accident, the GM determines which one is forced out of the square (or whether one falls prone).Prone and Incapacitated Creatures
You can share a space with a prone creature if that 
creature is willing, unconscious, or dead, and is your size or smaller. The GM might allow you to climb atop 
the corpse or unconscious body of a larger creature in some situations. A prone creature can't stand up while 
someone else occupies its space, but it can Crawl to a space where it's able to stand, or it can attempt to Shove 
the other creature out of the way.
Creatures of Different Sizes
In most cases, you can move through the space of a 
creature at least three sizes (see page 313) larger than you. 
This means a Medium creature can move through the 
space of a Gargantuan creature and a Small creature can 
312[diagram: counting movement]
move through the space of a Huge creature. Likewise, a 
bigger creature can move through the space of a creature 
three sizes smaller than itself or smaller. You still can't 
end your movement in a space occupied by a significantly 
larger or smaller creature. Tiny creatures are an exception. They can move through 
any creatures' spaces and can even end their movement there. See page 313 for more on Tiny creatures.
ObjectsBecause objects aren't as mobile as creatures are, they're 
more likely to fill a space. This means you can't always 
move through their spaces the same way you might 
move through a space occupied by a creature. You 
might be able to occupy the same square as a statue of 
your size, but not a wide column. The GM determines 
whether you can move into an object's square normally, 
can squeeze into the space, or are unable to move into 
the square at all. TERRAINSeveral types of terrain can complicate your movement by 
slowing you down, damaging you, or endangering you. 
DIFFICULT TERRAIN
Difficult terrain is any terrain that impedes your movement, ranging from particularly rough or unstable surfaces to thick ground cover and countless other impediments. Moving into a square of difficult terrain (or moving 5 feet into or within an area of difficult terrain, if you're not using a grid) costs an extra 5 feet of movement. Moving into a square of greater difficult terrain instead costs 10 additional feet of movement. This additional cost is not increased when moving diagonally.
Movement you make while jumping ignores the 
terrain you're jumping over. Some abilities (such as 
flight or being incorporeal) allow you to avoid the 
movement reduction from some types of difficult 
terrain. Certain other abilities let you ignore difficult 
terrain on foot; such an ability also allows you to move 
through greater difficult terrain at the same Speed cost 
as for difficult terrain, though these abilities don't let 
you ignore greater difficult terrain unless the ability 
specifies otherwise. 
You can't Step into difficult terrain (see page 308). 
HAZARDOUS TERRAIN
Hazardous terrain damages you whenever you move 
through it. For instance, an acid pool, a pit of burning 
embers, and a spike-filled passageway are all examples 
of hazardous terrain. The amount and type of damage 
depends on the specific hazardous terrain. 
NARROW SURFACES
A narrow surface is so precariously thin that you need 
to Balance (see Acrobatics on page 144) or risk falling. 
Even on a success, you are flat-footed on a narrow 
surface. Each time you are hit by an attack or fail a save 
COUNTING MOVEMENT
Lini decides to Stride. She has a Speed of 
20 feet. She moves straight south, spending 
5 feet of her Speed, then diagonally, spending 
another 5 feet. Her next diagonal move, 
because it's her second diagonal of the turn, 
costs her 10 feet of movement. She's spent 
all 20 feet of her Speed and ends that Stride.
She Seeks, and something catches her 
eye to the northeast, so she decides to move 
toward it. However, the crumbled stone is 
diflcult terrain, so each square costs 5 
more feet of Speed. She moves diagonally, 
spending 10 feet of movement since this is 
an odd-numbered diagonal. She wants to 
move northeast again, but that would cost 
her 15 feet (10 feet for an even-numbered 
diagonal and 5 more for being diflcult 
terrain). Instead, she decides to move 
directly north. This costs her 10 feet, and 
she's used all 20 feet of her Speed and is 
out of actions.5 feet5 feet10 feet10 feet10 feet15 feetLini313 Seonion a narrow surface, you need to Maintain Balance (see 
page 144) to avoid falling. 
UNEVEN GROUND
Uneven ground is an area unsteady enough that you need 
to Balance (see Acrobatics on page 144) or risk falling prone and possibly injuring yourself, depending on the 
specifics of the uneven ground. You are flat-footed on 
uneven ground. Each time you are hit by an attack or fail a save on uneven ground, you need to Maintain Balance (see page 144) to avoid falling prone. INCLINES
An incline is an area so steep that you need to Climb using 
the Athletics skill in order to progress upward. You're flat-
footed when Climbing an incline. SIZE AND SPACE
Creatures and objects come in various sizes that occupy different amounts of space. The sizes and the spaces they each take up on a grid are listed in Table 9–1: Sizes. This 
table also lists the typical reach for creatures of each size, split into values for tall creatures (such as most bipeds) and long creatures (like most quadrupeds). See page 297 for more information about reach. The Space entry lists how many feet on a side a creature's 
space is, so a Large creature fills a 10-foot-by-10-foot 
space (four squares on the grid). A Small or larger creature 
or object takes up at least 1 square on a grid, and creatures 
of these sizes can't usually share spaces except in situations 
like a character riding a mount. Rules for moving through 
other creatures' spaces appear on page 311.TABLE 9–1: SIZES
Size
SpaceReach (Tall)
Reach (Long)
Tinyless than 5 feet0 feet0 feetSmall5 feet5 feet5 feetMedium5 feet5 feet5 feetLarge10 feet10 feet5 feetHuge15 feet15 feet10 feetGargantuan20 feet or more
20 feet15 feetMultiple Tiny creatures can occupy the same square. 
At least four can fit in a single square, though the GM 
might determine that even more can fit. Tiny creatures can 
occupy a space occupied by a larger creature as well, and, 
if their reach is 0 feet, they must do so in order to attack. FLANKINGWhen you and an ally are on opposite sides of an enemy, 
you're flanking that enemy. While the enemy is flanked, 
it is flat-footed (taking a –2 circumstance penalty to AC) 
to the creatures who are flanking it. To flank a foe, you 
and your ally must be on opposites sides or opposite 
corners of the creature. A line drawn between the center 
of your space to the center of your ally's space must pass 
through either opposite sides or opposite corners of the 
enemy's space.
FLANKING1. Valeros and Kyra are fianking the 
ogre because they can draw a line 
to each other that passes through 
opposite sides of the ogre's space. 
The ogre is flat-footed to them, 
taking a –2 circumstance penalty 
to its AC.
2. Merisiel isn't fianking the ogre 
because she can't draw a line 
to Valeros or Kyra that passes 
through opposite sides of the 
ogre's space, and the ogre is not in 
Seoni's reach.
3. The hobgoblin and ogre fiank 
Seoni, since they can draw a 
line between them that passes 
through opposite sides of her 
space. If the ogre didn't have 10 
feet of reach, the two monsters 
wouldn't fiank her.
312 Valeros
MerisielKyra
314 Valeros
Both you and the ally have to be 
threatening that 
enemy: this means you both must be wielding weapons 
or ready to make unarmed attacks and not under any 
effects that prevent you from making attacks. If you 
have reach, you determine whether you are flanking 
creatures out to the distance of your reach because you 
threaten all of those squares. 
COVER
When you are behind a wall or some other hard surface 
that could potentially block weapons and other effects, 
you are behind cover. If you are behind cover, you 
gain a +2 circumstance bonus to your AC as well as 
to your Reflex saving throws against area effects. You 
can increase this bonus to +4 by Taking Cover (see 
page 308). A creature with cover can attempt to use 
Stealth to conceal its presence with the Hide action (see 
page 158).To determine whether a target has cover from an 
attack, the attacking creature or object draws a line 
from the center of its space to the center of the target's 
space. If that line passes through any blocking terrain, the target has cover. The cover grants that creature a 
+2 circumstance bonus to AC against the attack. When cover might benefit a creature attempting a Reflex saving throw against an area effect, draw the line from the effect's point of origin to the center of 
the creature's space. If the line passes though blocking 
terrain, the target has cover against the area effect. The Game Master might determine that a creature does not have cover if the blocking terrain is not sufficiently large. For example, a Huge dragon probably wouldn't 
receive any benefit from being behind a 1-foot-diameter 
pillar, since most of its body could be targeted easily.
COVER FROM LARGE CREATURES
If a creature between you and a target is two or 
more sizes larger than both you and your target, that 
creature's entire space is considered blocking terrain for 
the purpose of determining cover.
SCREENING
When you're attempting a ranged attack, or a melee 
attack against a nonadjacent target, your target might 
be screened from you if another creature is between 
you. If you must attack or shoot through the space of a 
creature that's one size smaller than you or larger, your 
target is screened from you and gains a +1 circumstance 
bonus to AC against your attack. Unlike cover and the 
concealed condition (see page 320), being screened 
doesn't allow a creature to attempt to Hide.
To determine whether your target is screened from 
your attack, pick the corner of your space with the least 
obstructed line to your target and draw a line to the center of the target's space. If you can't reach the center of the 
creature's space without passing through either blocking 
terrain or another creature that's one size smaller than 
you or larger, the target is screened against that attack. 
COVER AND SCREENING
1. Valeros and the ogre don't have cover from one 
another. The line from the center of Valeros's 
space to the center of the ogre's space doesn't 
pass through blocking terrain.
2. The ogre has cover from Merisiel. The line 
between the centers of their spaces crosses 
blocking terrain.3. Kyra can still see the ogre, but it has cover from 
her because the line from the center of her space 
to the center of its space goes through blocking 
terrain. It's also screened from her ranged 
attacks because the line from the most favorable 
corner of her space to the center of its space 
goes through blocking terrain.
4. Seoni doesn't have to worry about cover, but 
the ogre is screened from Seoni. There's an 
unblocked line between the centers of their 
spaces, but the line from the best corner of her 
space to the center of the ogre's space passes 
through Valeros, making the ogre screened. 
1234 Kyra
SeoniMerisiel315 Not every combat plays out with all parties standing on 
the ground. Some fights occur while the characters are 
atop mounts or when the PCs take to the sky or seas. MOUNTED COMBAT
When you are mounted during an encounter, a mount you 
control acts on your initiative. You must use the Handle 
an Animal and the Command an Animal actions (see 
page 153) to get your mount to spend its actions. If you 
don't, the animal wastes its actions. If you have the Ride 
general feat (see page 170), you can use the Command an 
Animal action without having to Handle an Animal first 
(or Command a Minion if the mount is a minion).For example, if you are mounted on a horse and you 
make three attacks, your horse would remain stationary 
since you didn't command it. If you instead spent your first 
action using the Handle an Animal action and succeeded, 
you could then use the Command an Animal action to 
get it to move its Speed. You could then spend your third 
action either to make an attack yourself or to command 
the horse to attack—but not both. 
MOUNTED ATTACKS
You and your mount fight as a unit. Consequently, you 
share a multiple attack penalty. For example, if you Strike 
and then Command an Animal to Strike, your mount's 
attack takes a –5 multiple attack penalty.
You act as if you were in any square of your mount's 
space for the purpose of making your attacks. This means 
that, as a Medium creature, you can attack a creature on 
one side of your Large mount, then attack a creature on the 
opposite side of your mount with your next action. If you 
have reach, the distance of your reach depends partly on the 
size of your mount. On a Medium or smaller mount, use 
your normal reach. If you're on a Large or Huge mount, 
you can attack any square adjacent to the mount if you 
have 5- or 10-foot reach, or any square within 10 feet of 
the mount (including diagonals) if you have 15-foot reach. 
MOUNTED DEFENSES
When you're mounted, attackers can target either you or 
your mount. Anything that targets multiple creatures (such 
as a spell with a burst area) affects both of you individually 
as long as you're both in the area. Your mount is larger 
than you and you share its space, so you are screened 
(see page 314) against attacks targeting you when you're 
mounted if the mount would be in the way. You count as 
being in an attacker's reach or range if any square of your 
mount is within the attacker's reach or range.
Because your movement is limited while you're riding a 
mount, you take a –2 circumstance penalty to Reflex saves 
while mounted. Additionally, the only move action you 
can take is the Mount basic action to dismount. AERIAL COMBAT
Many monsters can fly, and PCs can use spells and items 
to gain the ability to fly. Flying creatures have to use the 
Fly action (see page 309) to move through the air. Making 
an especially tricky maneuver—such as trying to reverse 
course 180 degrees, fly through a narrow gap safely, or 
skim the surface of a body of water—might require using the Maneuver in Flight action of the Acrobatics skill, which is a trained only action (see page 145). Creatures might fall from the sky, using the falling 
rules found on page 310. At the GM's discretion, some 
ground-based actions might not work in the air. For 
instance, most flying creatures can't Step.
AQUATIC COMBAT
For battles underwater or while floating in water, the 
following rules modify how you fight:
Ł You're flat-footed unless you have a swim Speed.

Ł You gain resistance 5 to acid and fire.

Ł You take a –2 circumstance penalty to melee bludgeoning or 
slashing attacks that pass through water, because either you 
or your target is underwater.

Ł Ranged attacks that deal bludgeoning or slashing damage 
automatically miss if the attacker or target is underwater, 
and piercing ranged attacks made by an underwater 
creature or against an underwater target have their range 
increments halved.

Ł You can't cast fire spells or use abilities with the fire trait 
underwater.

Ł At the GM's discretion, some ground-based actions might not 
work underwater or while fioating in water.
DROWNING AND SUFFOCATING
You can hold your breath for a number of actions equal 
to your Constitution score, or double your Constitution score if you use the Breathe Deep action (see page 309) before entering the airless environment. Each action that passes during your turn costs you 1 action worth 
of air, even if you do nothing with that action. Creatures 
that have fewer than 3 actions still lose a minimum of 3 actions' worth of air each turn. Each time you take an attack or manipulate action, you lose 2 actions' worth of air instead of 1. You also lose 2 actions' worth of air each 
time you get hit by an attack. Verbal actions cost you all 
your remaining air.
When you run out of air, you fall unconscious and 
start suffocating. While suffocating, you can't recover 
from being unconscious and you must attempt a DC 
20 Fortitude save at the end of each of your turns. On a 
failure, you take 1d10 damage, and on a critical failure 
you die. On each check after the first, the DC increases by 
5 and the damage by 1d10. These increases are cumulative. 
Once your access to air is restored, you stop suffocating 
and are no longer unconscious (unless you took enough 
damage from suffocation to reach 0 Hit Points, in which 
case you return to 1 HP and are unconscious).SPECIAL BATTLES
316 While encounters use rounds for combat and roughly real 
time for social encounters, exploration is more free-form. 
The GM determines the flow of time, as you could be 
traveling by horseback across craggy highlands, sailing on 
a ship, or delving in a dungeon in search of danger and 
treasure. Exploration lacks the overt danger of encounter 
mode, but it often has its own challenges. Much of exploration mode involves movement and 
roleplaying. You might be traveling from one part of 
a town to another, chatting with a couple of sages and 
experts at this business or that home along the way, or 
maybe having a terse conversation with some bored city 
guards as you pass through the city gates. Instead of 
measuring your rate of movement in 5-foot squares every 
6 seconds, you measure it in feet or miles per minute, 
hour, or day, using your travel Speed.
TRAVEL SPEED
Depending on how the GM wants to track movement, you 
move in feet or miles based on your character's Speed for 
the relevant movement type. Typical rates are given below.
TABLE 9–2: TRAVEL SPEED
SpeedFeet per Minute
Miles per HourMiles per Day
 10 feet1001815 feet1501-1/2
1220 feet20021625 feet2502-1/2
2030 feet30032435 feet3503-1/2
2840 feet 40043250 feet50054060 feet600648
The distances in the table assume traveling at a determined 
pace, but one that's not exhausting or dangerous, over flat 
and clear terrain. Moving through difficult terrain halves 
the listed movement rate. Greater difficult terrain reduces 
the distance traveled to one-third the normal amount. EXPLORATION TACTICS
While you are traveling and exploring, tell the GM what you'd generally like to do. The GM will determine which exploration tactic applies and describe the result. It isn't 
necessary to go into extreme detail, such as "Using my silver baton, I nudge the door forward so I can check the hinges for devious traps." Instead, "I'm searching the area for hazards" is sufficient. Use the list of common tactics that follows as inspiration. If you come up with 
your own idea, the GM will adjudicate your idea using these as a baseline. Some exploration tactics are fatiguing—these tactics 
cause the fatigued condition after 10 minutes of performing 
them. Such tactics are indicated by the word "fatiguing" in 
parentheses. While you're fatigued, the only tactic you can 
use is wandering. Taking a significant break to catch your 
breath can allow you to continue onward using a fatiguing 
tactic, but because of this, when you're traveling for a long 
time, you will sometimes need to use other tactics, like 
wandering, so you don't exhaust yourself.
The most common exploration tactics are detecting 
magic, hustling, searching, and sneaking. 
CASTING A SPELL (FATIGUING)
You repeatedly cast the same spell and move at half your 
travel Speed. Typically this spell is a cantrip that you want 
to have in effect in the event a combat breaks out. 
EXPLORATION MODE
317 CONCENTRATING ON A SPELL (FATIGUING)
You keep up the effects of a spell that requires concentration 
and move at half your travel Speed. 
COVERING TRACKS
You cover the group's tracks to prevent pursuit, rolling 
a Survival check to determine how successful you are. 
Covering tracks forces you to move at half your travel Speed 
unless something grants you the ability to move at full Speed 
while covering tracks. You still have to move as slowly as 
the slowest person whose tracks you are trying to cover.
DEFENDING
You move at half your travel Speed with your weapon 
out and shield raised. If combat breaks out, you gain the 
benefits of Raising a Shield before your first turn begins. 
DETECTING MAGIC
You cast 
detect magic while moving at half your travel 
Speed. You have no chance of accidentally overlooking a 
magic aura at a travel Speed under 300 feet per minute, 
but the party could move into a magic aura before you 
detect it for travel Speeds over 150 feet per minute. You 
can always move at a slower travel Speed while detecting 
magic to cover the area more thoroughly. Unlike most 
types of repeated spellcasting, detecting magic is not a 
fatiguing tactic. 
FOLLOWING TRACKS
You Track while moving half your travel Speed. 
HUSTLING (FATIGUING)
You strain yourself to move at double your travel Speed. 
INVESTIGATING
If you want to find out more information about your 
surroundings, you can move at half your travel Speed 
while using Recall Knowledge to look for clues among the 
things you can see. You can use any skill that has a Recall 
Knowledge action for the investigating tactic, but the GM 
determines whether the skill has any relevance. 
SEARCHING
You Seek meticulously for hidden doors, concealed 
hazards, and so on. You normally move at half Speed and 
make an educated guess as to which locations are best to 
check. In order to guarantee a chance to detect any hazard 
or secret before walking into it, you must move at a travel 
Speed of no more than 100 feet per minute. You can slow 
down to that travel Speed if thoroughness is necessary.
SNEAKING
You attempt a Stealth check to avoid notice while moving 
at half your travel Speed, unless you have an ability to 
move at full Speed while Sneaking. If you're Sneaking at 
an encounter's start, you usually roll a Stealth check instead 
of a Perception check as part of your initiative roll, both to 
determine initiative order and to see if the enemies notice you. 
WANDERING
You move at your travel Speed.
SOCIAL TACTICS
Exploration mode covers more than just wandering in the 
wilderness or exploring a dungeon—it can also be used in 
town while perusing a market or hobnobbing with nobles 
at the queen's jubilee. Use the following ideas as inspiration 
when describing your actions in an urban or social setting. 
CAROUSING
You enjoy yourself in the company of other characters, 
partaking in whatever activity is happening, whether it's 
dicing, drinking, or telling tall tales. This tactic is useful 
when you plan to use Diplomacy to gather information or 
otherwise listen to rumors and news about current events. CONVERSING
You engage in a significant back-and-forth conversation 
with other characters in a single location. You use this 
tactic when you plan to use Deception to Lie or Make 
an Impression, or to use Intimidation to Coerce, not for 
back-and-forth banter with the other PCs. 
LOOKING OUT
While you take efforts to remain polite and minimally 
engaged in events, you are actually keeping an eye out 
for trouble. This tactic is used when you want to use 
Perception to watch for threats or deceptions. 
SHOPPING
You wander through a market or store looking for items 
you need to buy for your next adventure. 
STEALING (FATIGUING)
Others might think you are simply wandering, but in fact 
you are looking for easy targets to Steal an Object. 
REST AND DAILY PREPARATIONS
You perform at your best when you take enough time to 
rest and prepare. Once every 24-hour period, you can take 
a period of rest (typically 8 hours), and then prepare, which 
typically takes 1 hour. After your rest, you regain a number 
of Hit Points equal to your Constitution modifier (minimum 
1) times your level. When you prepare, you regain resources 
that you can use only a limited number of times per day. For 
instance, if you are a spellcaster, you regain spell slots and 
can prepare new spells. If you have Spell Points, you regain 
those. Magic item uses refresh, and so on. You can make your daily preparations only if you've 
rested, and it's typically best to do so right after. If you 
don't rest at least 6 hours in a 24-hour span, you become 
fatigued (you cannot recover from this until you rest).318 Downtime mode is played day-by-day rather than minute-by-minute. Usually this mode of play occurs when you are 
in the safety of a settlement, maybe recouping from your 
adventures or studying an artifact you found. Downtime 
gives you time to rest fully, which grants more benefits 
than the healing you could gain on the road, or to engage 
in crafting or another professional endeavor, learn new 
spells, retrain feats, gather information, or just have some 
light-hearted or even larcenous fun. You can spend an entire day resting during downtime 
to recover double the Hit Points you normally would for 
resting for a night. If you don't want to pay for food and 
lodging, you can use your downtime to scavenge and 
subsist using Survival (when in the wilderness) or Society 
(when in a settlement). You can also sell items acquired 
during your adventures, buy new goods, and perform 
other activities as determined by your feats, your skills, 
and the settlement where you are spending the downtime. RETRAININGRetraining offers a way to alter some of your character 
options, which can be helpful when you want to grow your 
character in a new direction or simply change decisions 
that weren't as interesting or effective as you expected. 
The three things you can retrain are feats (except heritage 
feats), skill proficiencies and increases, and selectable class 
features (like wizard schools or sorcerer spells known). 
DOWNTIME
OTHER DOWNTIME ACTIVITIES
The Skills chapter includes several downtime activities you can 
do, which are summarized here.
Craft: Using the Crafting skill, you can create items from raw 
materials (see pages 147–148).
Gather Information:
 Investigate a subject by socializing and 
asking questions (see page 150).Practice a Trade:
 You earn money by applying the expertise of 
one of your Lore skills (see pages 151–152).
Stage a Performance:
 Plan and execute a performance for an 
audience to earn money and fame (see pages 155–156).
Subsist on the Streets:
 You provide for yourself by scavenging 
in a city (see page 157).
Survive in the Wild:
 You find food and shelter in the wilderness 
(see pages 158–159).
You cannot retrain your ancestry, background, or class. 
Usually you must find a teacher to teach you new abilities. 
The GM will let you know how long it takes, but expect 
skills and feats to take around a week and class features 
to take at least a month. Some abilities can be difficult or 
impossible to retrain (for instance, a sorcerer can retrain 
her bloodline only in extraordinary circumstances). In 
general when retraining, you can't make choices that you 
couldn't when first making your character; for instance, 
you can't exchange a feat for a different type of feat, a 
higher-level feat, or one that requires prerequisites you 
didn't meet at the time you took the original feat.
319 Over the course of adventuring, characters (and sometimes 
their belongings) are affected by abilities and effects that 
apply conditions. Conditions change your state of being in 
some way. You might be gripped with fear or made faster 
by a spell or magic item. One condition represents what 
happens when a creature successfully drains your blood 
or life essence, while others represent creatures' attitudes 
toward you and how they interact with you. 
Conditions are persistent; when you're affected by 
a condition, its effects last until the condition's stated 
duration ends, the condition is removed, or terms dictated 
in the condition itself cause it to end. CONDITION VALUES
Some conditions have a numerical value, called a 
condition value, indicated by a numeral following the 
condition. This value might enumerate a bonus or penalty 
the condition gives you. These values can often be reduced 
by spells, skills, or simply waiting. If such a value is ever 
reduced to 0, the condition ends. If you're affected by a condition with a value multiple 
times, you apply only the higher value, although you might 
have to track both durations if one has a lower value but 
lasts longer. For example, if you had a slowed 2 condition 
that lasts 2 rounds and a slowed 1 condition that lasts for 
1 minute, after 2 rounds you'd change from being slowed 
2 to slowed 1 for the last 8 rounds of its duration. REDUNDANT CONDITIONS
You can have a given condition only once at a time 
(conditions with different values are considered different 
conditions for this purpose; see Condition Values). If an 
effect would impose a condition you're already being 
affected by, you now have that condition for the longer 
of the two durations. The shorter-duration condition 
effectively ends, though other conditions caused by the 
original, shorter-duration effect might continue. 
For example, let's say you have been hit by a monster 
that drains your vitality; that wound causes you to be 
enfeebled 2 and flat-footed until the end of the monster's 
next turn. Before the end of that creature's next turn, a 
trap poisons you, making you enfeebled 2 for 1 minute. In this case, the enfeebled 2THat lasts for 1 minute replaces the enfeebled 2 from the monster. You would continue to 
be enfeebled 2 for this longer duration, but you would still remain flat-footed only until the end of the monster's 
next turn. Any ability that removes a condition removes it 
entirely, no matter what its condition value is or how 
many times you've been affected by it. In the example 
above, a spell that removes the enfeebled condition from you would remove it entirely—the spell wouldn't need to 
remove it twice. 
OVERRIDING CONDITIONS
Some conditions override others, as described in the 
condition. All effects of the overridden condition are 
suppressed until the overriding condition ends. The 
overridden condition's duration continues to elapse, and 
it might expire while suppressed. COUNTERACTING CONDITIONS
Some effects counteract conditions, afflictions (see 
page 324), and other effects. When attempting to 
counteract an effect, compare the counteract level of 
the effect with the counteract level of the ability you are 
using. A spell's counteract level is equal to its spell level; 
see Table 9–3 (page 320) for the counteract levels of other 
abilities. If your ability has a higher counteract level than 
that of the effect to be counteracted, you automatically 
succeed. If your ability's counteract level is the same as the 
effect's counteract level or lower, you must succeed at a 
check using the relevant skill or ability against the DC of 
the target effect. You take a cumulative –5 penalty to this 
check for every level by which your ability's counteract 
level is lower than the target's. If your ability is 4 or more 
counteract levels lower than that of the effect you are 
trying to counteract, your attempt automatically fails. On a successful counteract check, the condition or 
effect immediately ends. BOLSTEREDSome spells and abilities can't affect a creature more than 
once in a day. If an effect says a creature becomes bolstered, 
repeated applications of that effect don't do anything to the 
creature. For example, the blindness spell says, "The target 
is bolstered against all castings of blindness." Casting 
blindness on that creature again would have no effect. 
Unless otherwise stated, a creature remains bolstered 
for 24 hours against only that specific ability used by that 
specific creature. Blindness has an exception, bolstering 
the target against the spell no matter who casts it. Being 
bolstered doesn't prevent ongoing effects of the source 
of the condition. For instance, if an ability makes you 
frightened and bolsters you against it, you don't cease to 
be frightened due to becoming bolstered—you just don't 
become frightened again if the same creature targets you 
with that ability later that day.
ALTERING ACTIONS
Conditions can change the number of actions you can 
spend on your turn, or whether you can use actions, 
reactions, or free actions at all. The slow condition, for 
example, causes you to lose actions, while quick causes 
you to gain actions. The most restrictive form of this is when a condition 
states that you can't act: this means you can't spend 
actions, activities, reactions, or free actions. When you 
can't act, you don't regain your actions and reaction on 
your turn. CONDITIONS320 SPEED REDUCTIONSome conditions reduce your Speed in one or more 
movement types. These can't reduce your Speed below 
5 feet unless stated otherwise. Speed reductions to the 
same movement type from different sources (such as from 
armor and the hampered condition) are cumulative. BASIC CONDITIONSThe conditions defined here occur frequently in the game. 
Any other ability that causes a unique condition—such 
as a spell—details that condition within the ability itself. 
ACCELERATED
Your Speed is increased. Accelerated is always followed 
by a number indicating how many feet the condition 
increases your movement Speed by (for example, 
accelerated 10 increases your Speed by 10 feet). If the 
condition doesn't specify which of your movement types 
it applies to, it applies to all of them, but it doesn't grant 
you any movement types that you don't already have.
ASLEEP
You can't act. Furthermore, you have the blinded and 
flat-footed conditions and take a –4 conditional penalty 
to AC and Perception. You critically fail all Reflex saves 
you must attempt. When you gain this condition, you fall 
prone and drop items you are holding or wielding unless 
the effect states otherwise or the GM determines you're in 
a position in which you wouldn't.
If you take damage while asleep, the condition ends. 
If you are within an ally's natural reach, that ally can 
usually nudge or shake you awake with an Interact 
action. If there is loud noise going on around you, at the 
start of your turn you can attempt a Perception check 
as a free action with a –4 circumstance penalty against 
the noise's DC (or the lowest DC if there is more than 
one noise), waking up if you succeed. For creatures 
attempting to stay quiet, this is a Stealth DC. Some 
magical effects make you sleep so deeply that they don't 
allow you to attempt this Perception check. BLINDED
You can't see. While blinded, you treat all terrain as difficult 
terrain. All other creatures and objects are unseen to you 
(see page 303) unless you succeed at a Seek action to sense 
them. You automatically fail or critically fail (whichever's 
worse) Perception checks that are fully dependent on sight, 
and if vision is your only precise sense, you take a –4 
conditional penalty to Perception checks. You are immune 
to visual effects. Blinded overrides dazzled. BROKEN
Broken is a condition that affects objects. A broken object 
can't be used for its normal function, nor does it grant 
bonuses. It still imposes the penalties and limitations 
normally incurred by carrying, holding, or wearing it. For 
example, a suit of armor would still impose its Dexterity 
modifier cap, check penalty, and so forth.
Broken armor is an exception. It still grants its item 
bonuses, but also gives you a conditional penalty to AC 
depending on its category: –1 for broken light armor, –2
 for 
broken medium armor, or –3 for broken heavy armor.
CONCEALED
While you are concealed from a creature, such as in a 
thick fog, you are difficult for that creature to see, but 
you are not unseen. A creature that you're concealed from 
must succeed at a DC 5 flat check when making an attack 
against you or targeting you with a spell or effect, unless 
the attack is an area effect. If the check fails, the attack, 
spell, or effect misses with no effect. For more information 
on being concealed, see page 302.CONFUSED
You don't have your wits about you, and you act rashly. 
You can't use reactions, nor can you Delay or Ready. On 
each of your turns, you must use your actions to attack the 
creature that attacked you most recently since your last 
turn. The GM might allow you to use actions to draw a 
weapon, move so the creature is in reach, and so forth, as 
long as the actions lead up to you attacking as required. If no creature attacked you since your last turn, roll 
1d4. On a 1, you must spend your turn attempting to attack the nearest creature to you. On a 2, you must attack yourself once, hitting automatically for your normal damage, and use no further actions. On a 3, you must do nothing but babble incoherently. On a 4, you can 
act normally.
TABLE 9–3: COUNTERACT LEVELS
Ability or Effect Level
Counteract Level
001121324253637484951051161261371471581681791891910+20+10+321 DAZZLED
Your eyes are overstimulated. If vision is your only precise 
sense, all creatures and objects are concealed from you. DEAD
You are no longer alive. You can't act or be affected by 
spells that target creatures (unless they specifically target 
dead creatures), and for all other purposes you count as 
an object. When you gain the dead condition, you go to 
0 HP if you had a different amount, and you can't be 
brought above 0 HP as long as you remain dead. DEAFENED
You can't hear. You automatically fail or critically fail 
(whichever's worse) Perception checks based on sound. 
You take a –2 conditional penalty to Perception checks 
for initiative and checks that involve sound but also rely on other senses. If you perform an action that involves auditory elements, you must succeed at a DC 5 flat check or the action is lost; attempt the check after spending the action but before any effects are applied. You are immune 
to auditory effects. 
DRAINED
When a creature successfully drains you of blood or 
some other life force, you become less healthy. Drained 
always includes a value. You take a conditional penalty 
equal to the value on Fortitude saves and Constitution-based checks. You also lose a number of Hit Points 
equal to your level (minimum 1) times the drained 
value, and your maximum Hit Points are reduced by the 
same amount. For example, if you're hit with an effect 
that inflicts drained 3 and you're a 3rd-level character, 
you lose 9 Hit Points and reduce your maximum Hit 
Points by 9. Losing these Hit Points doesn't count as 
taking damage. In most cases, the drained condition heals naturally at a 
slow rate. Each day, when you regain Hit Points by resting, 
your drained value is reduced by 1. This increases your 
maximum Hit Points, but you don't immediately recover 
the lost Hit Points. When the drained value reaches 0, you 
no longer have this condition. 
DYING
You are bleeding out or otherwise at death's door. Dying 
always includes a value, and if it ever reaches dying 4, you 
die. If you're dying, the recovery saving throws from the 
unconscious condition determine whether you get better 
or worse (see page 295). If you have 1 HP or more and are 
conscious, your dying condition decreases by 1 at the end 
of your turn each round. 
ENCUMBERED
You are carrying more weight than you can manage. If 
you're encumbered, decrease your Speed by 10 feet, to a 
minimum of 5 feet. This applies to every movement type 
you have. You also increase your armor's check penalty by 
2, or take a –2 check penalty if you're unarmored. ENERVATED
Enervation makes you less competent, as though your hard-earned experience had drained away. Enervated always 
includes a value. You take a conditional penalty equal to 
your enervated value on checks that include a proficiency 
modifier. The penalty can't exceed your level, even if the 
enervated value is greater. For example, if you become 
enervated 4 and were level 3, you'd take only a –3 penalty.
In addition, you treat your level as though it were lowered by your enervated value (to a minimum of 1st level) when determining which spells you can cast and which abilities you can use. This applies only to actions, activities, free actions, and reactions you gained from feats and class features, and only those that have a level prerequisite. You don't lose your prepared spells, but you 
can't cast those that are higher level than the enervated 
condition allows. You regain access to them if your 
enervated value is sufficiently reduced. Every day you can attempt a Fortitude save to reduce 
your enervated value by 1 (or 2 on a critical success). The 
DC is the same as that of the effect that enervated you. If 
multiple effects enervated you, use the highest DC for your 
daily checks to recover from enervated. You can also spend 
a day of downtime training to reduce your enervated value 
by 1 automatically (in addition to attempting one save for 
that day to reduce your enervated value).
ENFEEBLED
You're physically weakened. Enfeebled always includes a 
value. When you are enfeebled, you take a conditional 
penalty equal to the enfeebled value on attack rolls, 
damage rolls, and Strength-based checks. 
ENTANGLED
A snare or another entrapping effect holds you back. 
You're hampered 10 (see the condition). If you attempt a 
manipulate action, activity, free action, or reaction while 
entangled, you must succeed at a DC 5 flat check or it is 
lost; attempt the check after using it but before any effects 
are applied. 
FASCINATED
You are compelled to focus your attention on something, 
which distracts you from other things going on around you. You take a –2 conditional penalty to Perception 
and skill checks, and you can't use actions, activities, 
free actions, or reactions with the concentrate trait unless they or their intended consequences are related to the subject of your fascination (as determined by the GM). For instance, you might be able to Seek and Recall Knowledge about the subject, but not cast 
magic missile
. This condition ends if creatures act in a hostile fashion toward you or your allies.322 
FATIGUED
You're tired, and expending energy makes you worse off. 
You're hampered 5 (see page 323). You take a –1
 conditional 
penalty to AC and saving throws; each action you use during 
an encounter increases the penalty by 1 until the start of 
your next turn. For example, if you use 1STride action and 
2STrike actions on your turn, the conditional penalty would 
increase by 3 to a –4 penalty, which would reset to –1 at 
the start of your next turn. The penalty increases after each 
action you spend, so if you triggered an attack as a reaction 
to the first action you used, you'd take a –2 conditional 
penalty to AC against that attack. If you're fatigued in exploration mode, you can't choose 
any tactic other than wandering. 
You recover from fatigue with a full night's rest (8 hours).
FLAT-FOOTED
You're unable to focus your full attention on defense. You 
take a –2 circumstance penalty to AC. 
FLEEING
You're forced to run away due to fear or some other 
compulsion. On your turn, you must spend each of your 
actions trying to escape the source of the fleeing condition 
as expediently as possible (such as by using move actions 
like Climbing or Flying to flee, or opening doors barring 
your escape). The source is usually the effect or caster that 
gave you the condition, though some effects might define 
something else as the source from which you must flee. 
You can't Delay or Ready while fleeing.
FRIENDLY
This condition affects only creatures that are not 
player characters. This attitude reflects a creature's 
disposition toward the character who applied the 
condition. A creature that is friendly to a character likes 
that character. The character can attempt to make a 
Request of a friendly creature, and the friendly creature 
is likely to agree to a simple and safe request that 
doesn't cost it much to fulfill. A character gains a +2 
circumstance bonus to Lie, to Make an Impression on, or 
Request things from a friendly creature. This condition 
ends if the character who applied the condition (or the 
allies of that character) acts in a hostile fashion toward 
the creature. 
FRIGHTENED
You're gripped by fear and struggle to control your 
nerves. The frightened condition always includes 
a value. You take a conditional penalty equal to this 
value to your checks and saving throws. Unless specified 
otherwise, at the end of each of your turns, the value of 
your frightened condition decreases by 1.
GRABBED
You're held in place by another creature, making you 
immobile and flat-footed. If you attempt a manipulate 
action, activity, free action, or reaction while grabbed, 
you must succeed at a DC 5 flat check or it is lost; 
attempt the check after using it but before any effects 
are applied.323 
HAMPERED
Your Speed is reduced. Hampered is always followed by a 
number indicating by how many feet the condition reduces 
your Speed. This condition can't reduce your Speed below 
5 feet. If the condition doesn't specify which of your 
movement types it applies to, it applies to all of them. You 
can have both the accelerated and hampered conditions at 
the same time, so if you were accelerated 10 and hampered 
15, your Speed would be reduced by 5 feet. 
HELPFUL
This condition affects only creatures that aren't player 
characters. This attitude reflects a creature's disposition 
toward the character who applied the condition. A 
creature that is helpful to a character wishes to actively 
aid that character. It will accept reasonable Requests 
from that character, as long as such requests aren't at the 
expense of the helpful creature's goals or quality of life. 
A character gains a +4 circumstance bonus to Deception 
checks to Lie to the helpful creature. This condition ends 
if the character who applied the condition (or the allies 
of that character) acts in a hostile fashion toward the 
creature, and the creature could gain a worse attitude 
condition depending on the severity of the hostile act. 
HOSTILE
This attitude affects only creatures that are not player characters. This condition reflects a creature's disposition 
toward the character who applied the condition. A 
creature that is hostile to a character actively seeks to harm the character. It doesn't necessarily attack, but it 
won't accept Requests from the character. A character 
takes a –4 penalty to Make an Impression and Lie actions against a creature hostile to them. 
IMMOBILE
You can't use any action, activity, free action, or reaction 
that has the move trait. If an external force would move 
you out of your space, it must succeed at a check against 
either the DC of the effect rooting you or the relevant 
defense (usually Fortitude DC) of a monster rooting 
you, as appropriate. 
INDIFFERENT
This attitude affects only creatures that are not player 
characters. This condition reflects a creature's disposition 
toward the character who applied the condition. A creature 
that is indifferent to a character doesn't really care one 
way or the other about the character. The rules assume a 
creature's attitude is indifferent unless specified otherwise.
PARALYZED
Your body is frozen in place. You have the flat-footed 
condition and can't act except to Recall Knowledge and 
act in other ways that require only the use of your mind 
(as determined by the GM).
PERSISTENT DAMAGE
Persistent damage comes from effects like acid or burning 
and appears as "X persistent [type] damage," where the 
"X" is the amount of damage dealt and "[type]" is the 
damage type. While affected by persistent damage, at 
the end of your turn you take the specified amount and 
type of damage, after which you can attempt a DC 20 
flat check to remove the persistent damage. You roll 
the damage dice anew each time you take the persistent 
damage. Immunities, resistances, and weaknesses all 
apply to persistent damage. If an effect deals damage 
immediately and also deals persistent damage, you don't 
take the persistent damage if you negate the other damage. 
For example, an attack that deals slashing damage and 
persistent bleed damage wouldn't deal the persistent bleed 
damage if you blocked all of the slashing damage. 
You can be simultaneously affected by multiple 
persistent damage conditions so long as they have different 
damage types. If you would gain more than one persistent 
damage condition with the same damage type, the higher 
amount of damage overrides the lower amount. All 
types of persistent damage occur at once, so if something 
triggers when you take damage, it triggers only one time. Persistent damage can have the bleed type, meaning it 
affects only living creatures that need blood to survive. 
Bleeding automatically ends if you're healed to your 
maximum Hit Points. You or an ally can spend actions to help you recover 
from persistent damage, such as casting healing spells or 
using Medicine to Administer First Aid against bleeding, dousing a flame, or washing off acid; successfully doing so reduces the DC of that condition's flat check to 15 
and usually lets you immediately attempt an extra flat check to end that persistent damage. The reduction to the DC lasts until you remove the persistent damage or gain another persistent damage condition with the same damage type. 
PETRIFIED
You have been turned to stone. You can't act and you 
have the blinded and deafened conditions. You become 
an object with a Bulk equal to twice your normal Bulk (typically 16 for a petrified Medium creature or 8 for a petrified Small creature), AC 9, TAC 5, and Hardness 8. 
In this state, you can take a number of Dents equal to 1 plus your Constitution modifier (minimum 1) before 
being broken (see page 320). When you're turned back into flesh, you have as many HP as when you turned into a statue minus 5 HP for every Dent your statue had taken. This can't reduce you below a minimum of 1 HP, and if 
your statue was broken you return with exactly 1 HP. If 
the statue is completely destroyed, you immediately die. PRONE
You're lying on the ground. You take a –2 circumstance 
penalty to attack rolls but gain a +1 circumstance bonus 324to AC against ranged attacks. You're flat-footed against 
melee attacks. The only move actions you can use while you're prone are Crawl and Stand. Standing up ends the prone condition. If you're Climbing or Flying when you would be 
knocked prone, you fall instead (see page 310 for the rules 
on falling). You can't be knocked prone when Swimming 
unless you sink to the bottom of a body of water.
QUICK
You gain 1 additional action at the start of your turn 
each round. Many effects that make you quick specify the 
types of actions you can use with this additional action. If 
you become quick from multiple sources, you can use the 
extra action granted to use any single action granted by 
any of the effects that made you quick. 
RESTRAINED
You're tied up so you can barely move or a creature 
has you pinned. You have the immobile and flat-footed 
conditions, and you can't do anything with the attack or 
manipulate traits except Break Grapple or Escape. The restrained condition overrides grabbed. SENSED
You become sensed when you were unseen by a creature 
(see below) but that creature has managed to determine the space you're in (usually by succeeding at the Seek action). A creature who has sensed you is flat-footed to you but can target you with a Strike or another action that targets individuals, though it must succeed at a DC 11 flat check or the action fails to affect you. SIC
KYou feel ill. Sick always includes a value. You take a 
conditional penalty equal to this value on all your checks. 
You can't willingly ingest anything (including potions) 
while sick. You can spend an action retching in an attempt to recover, 
which lets you attempt a Fortitude save against the DC of 
the effect that made you sick. On a success, you reduce 
your sickness value by 1 (or by 2 on a critical success).
SLOWED
You can spend fewer actions. Slowed always includes a 
value. When you regain your actions at the start of your 
turn, reduce that number of actions by your slowed value. 
You can't Ready an action when you're slowed. If you 
become slowed during your turn, you don't lose any 
actions until the start of your next turn. 
SLUGGISH
Your movements become clumsy and inexact. Sluggish 
always includes a value. When you are sluggish, you take a conditional penalty to AC, attack rolls, Dexterity-based checks, and Reflex saves equal to the condition's value.
STUNNED
Your body is unresponsive. You can't act.
STUPEFIED
Your thoughts and instincts are clouded. Stupefied always 
includes a value. You take a conditional penalty equal 
to the value on spell rolls; spell DCs; and Intelligence-, 
Wisdom-, and Charisma-based checks. Anytime you 
attempt to cast a spell while stupefied, the spell is disrupted 
unless you succeed at a spell roll against the DC of the 
effect that gave you the stupefied condition. 
UNCONSCIOUS
You've been knocked out. You can't act, and you have 
the blinded, deafened, and flat-footed conditions, and you 
take a –4 conditional penalty to AC. When you gain this 
condition, you fall prone and drop items you are wielding 
or holding unless the effect states otherwise or the GM 
determines you're in a position in which you wouldn't. 
You must attempt a recovery saving throw (see page 295) 
at the start of each of your turns. 
UNFRIENDLY
This attitude affects only creatures that are not player 
characters. This condition reflects a creature's disposition 
toward the character who applied the condition. A 
creature that is unfriendly to a character dislikes and 
specifically distrusts that character. The creature won't 
accept Requests from the character. A character takes a 
–2 circumstance penalty to Lie and Make an Impression 
actions against an unfriendly creature. UNSEEN
When you are unseen by a creature, that creature cannot 
see you at all, has no idea what space you occupy, and 
can't target you with attacks or targeted spells and effects, 
though you still can be affected by area effects. The 
creature can attempt to guess which square you're in to 
try targeting you, as detailed on page 303. When you're 
unseen by a creature, that creature is flat-footed to you. A creature can use the Seek action to try to find you. If it 
succeeds, you cease to be unseen by it and are sensed instead. AFFLICTIONSDiseases, gases, poisons, and venoms are types of 
afflictions, as are some alchemical items, curses, and 
other effects. An affliction can infect a creature for a long 
time, progressing through different and often increasingly 
debilitating stages. The level of an affliction is the level of 
the monster or item causing the affliction, or, in the case 
of a spell, is listed in the affliction entry in the spell's effect.
Afflictions appear in the following format. NAME AND
 TYPEThe name of the affliction is given first, followed by the 
affliction's traits in parentheses and any unusual details.
325 
SAVING THROW
When you're first exposed to the affliction, you must attempt a saving throw against it. This first attempt to stave off the affliction is called the initial save. An affliction usually requires a Fortitude save, but the exact save and its DC are listed after the name and type of affliction. Spells that can poison you typically use the caster's spell DC.
On a successful or a critically successful saving throw, 
you are unaffected by that exposure to the affliction. 
You do not need to attempt further saving throws 
against it unless you are exposed to the affliction again. 
If you fail the initial saving throw, after its onset 
period (if applicable), you go to stage 1 of the affliction 
and are subjected to the listed effect. On a critical 
failure, after its onset period (if applicable) you go to 
stage 2 of the affliction and take that effect instead. See 
Stages below.
ONSET
 Some afflictions have onset times. For these afflictions, 
once you fail your initial save, you don't gain the effects 
for the first stage of the affliction until the onset time elapses. If this entry is absent, you gain the effects for the first stage immediately upon reaching that stage. 
MAXIMUM DURATION
If an affliction lasts only a limited amount of time, it lists 
a maximum duration. Otherwise, the affliction lasts until 
you succeed at enough saves to recover.
STAGES
An affliction typically has multiple stages, each of which 
lists an effect followed by an interval in parentheses. 
When you reach a given stage of an affliction, you are 
subjected to the effects listed for that stage. 
At the end of a stage's interval, you must attempt a 
new saving throw. On a success, you reduce the stage 
by 1 and take the effects of that stage again. On a critical 
success, you reduce the stage by 2. If the affliction's 
stage is ever reduced to lower than stage 1, the affliction 
ends and you don't need to attempt further saves unless 
you're exposed to the affliction again. On a failure, the stage increases by 1, and on a critical 
failure its stage increases by 2. If a failure or critical 
failure would increase the stage beyond the highest 
listed stage, the affliction instead repeats the effects of 
the highest stage. 
CONDITIONS FROM AFFLICTIONS
An affliction might give you conditions with a longer or shorter duration than the affliction. For instance, if an affliction causes you to be drained but has a maximum 
duration of 5 minutes, you remain drained even after the affliction ends, as is normal for the drained condition. Alternatively, you might succeed at the flat check to 
remove persistent damage you took from an ongoing affliction, but you would still need to attempt saves to remove the affliction itself, and failing one might give you 
new persistent damage. 
MULTIPLE EXPOSURES
Multiple exposures to the same affliction have no effect if it's a curse or disease. However, for a poison, failing the 
initial saving throw against a new dose increases the stage by 1 (or by 2 if you critically fail) without affecting the maximum duration. This is true even if you're within the 
poison's onset period, though it doesn't change the length 
of the onset period. 
VIRULENT AFFLICTIONS
Afflictions with the virulent trait are harder to remove. You must succeed at two consecutive saves to reduce a 
virulent affliction's stage by 1. A critical success reduces a 
virulent affliction's stage by only 1 instead of by 2.
AFFLICTION EXAMPLE
To see how a poison works, let's look at the Effect of the arsenic 
alchemical item (see page 361 for the full item listing). Note that 
afflictions use this abbreviated format in spell stat blocks.
Arsenic (poison) You can't reduce your sick condition while 
aflected by arsenic.
 Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 15; 
Onset 10 minutes; Maximum Duration
 5 minutes; Stage 1 1 poison damage and sick 1 (1 minute); 
Stage 2 1d4 poison damage 
and sick 2 (1 minute); Stage 3
 2d4 poison damage and sick 3 (1 minute)For example, if you drank a glass of wine laced with arsenic, you 
would attempt an initial Fortitude save against the listed DC of 15. 
If you fail your save, you advance to stage 1. Because of the onset 
time, nothing happens for 10 minutes, but once this time passes, you 
take 1 poison damage and become sick 1. As noted, you're unable 
to reduce the sick condition you gain from arsenic. The interval of 
stage 1 is 1 minute (as shown in parentheses), so you attempt a new 
save after 1 minute passes. If you succeed, you reduce the stage 
by
 1, recovering from the poison. If you fail again, you move to 
stage 2, taking 1d4 poison damage and becoming sick 2. 
If your initial save against the arsenic was a critical failure, you 
would go straight to stage 2. After the 10-minute onset time, you 
would take 1d4 poison damage and become sick 2. Succeeding at 
your second save would cause you to go to stage 1, taking 1 poison 
damage and reducing your sick value to 1. Failing the second save 
would advance you to stage 3.
If you make it to stage 3 of the poison, either by failing while at 
stage 2 or critically failing while at stage 1, you'd take 2d4 poison 
damage and be sick 3. If you failed or critically failed your saving 
throw while at stage 3, you would repeat the Effects of stage 3.
Since the poison has a maximum duration of 5 minutes, you recover 
from it once the 5 minutes pass, no matter which stage you're at.
326 As Game Master, you run each session of Pathfinder, providing the link 
between the players and the world of the game. This ensures everyone is 
imagining the same things as their characters explore the world,  interact 
with people, and battle monsters.
RUNNING A GAME SESSION
A campaign happens over a series of sessions, each several 
hours long with multiple encounters, some exploration, 
and possibly downtime. Think of a session like an episode 
of a TV show. It should include some twists, turns, and 
changes, then leave people excited about what comes next. 
STARTING A SESSION
Once everyone is ready, get everyone's attention and cover 
the following topics. These steps are in a rough order you 
can change based on your group's style or a session's needs.

Ł Recap what happened in the previous sessions. 

Ł Establish where the characters are at the start of the new 
session. Have they been resting? Are they in a hallway, 
preparing to raid the next room of a dungeon? At this point, 
you should also tell players whether their characters had 
time to rest or recover since the last session.

Ł Let players know how many Hero Points their characters 
have (see page 300). Each character always starts each 
session with 1 Hero Point, and you can award 1 more for a 
player who hosts the game, brings food or supplies, keeps 
notes or maps, or does anything else that benefits the group.

Ł Establish goals. The players should have an idea of what they 
want to do next. Reestablish goals the group already had, 
then let the players weigh in on anything else they plan to 
accomplish—or whether the old goals still apply.

Ł Commence adventuring! Decide which mode of play you're 
going to start in, then lead off with a verbal prompt to get the 
action started. You might ask a question related to a particular 
character, have a monster attack and immediately roll 
initiative, or briefiy describe the environment and sensations 
that surround the characters and then let them react.
RUNNING A SESSION
During a session, you're in charge of keeping the game 
on track, managing the different modes of play, fielding 
questions, and making rules decisions. You'll also want to 
keep a rough eye on the time so you can end at a good point. You're the interface between the rules and the imagined 
world you and the other players share. They will sometimes 
ask you questions and act based on their assumptions. It's 
up to you to establish what's true in the world, but you 
When you take on the role of Game Master, you'll gain the 
immense rewards of crafting fun experiences for an entire 
group of your friends. Your responsibilities include...

Ł Telling the story of the group's adventures in a compelling 
and consistent way.

Ł Preparing for game sessions by building or studying 
adventures and creating characters and plots.

Ł Fleshing out the world where the game takes place, 
emphasizing the fantastical while grounding it just enough 
in the real world to feel believable.

Ł Improvising the reactions of nonplayer characters and other 
forces in the world as the players do unexpected things.

Ł Making rules calls to keep the game going and ensure  fairness.

Ł Entertaining the players and yourself with novel concepts 
and rewarding creative ideas with interesting outcomes.
Pathfinder games are typically structured as a 
campaign—a story covering a party of characters. This 
campaign is subdivided into adventures, which are smaller 
stories that involve exploration and interaction with 
nonplayer characters. Adventures each generally represent 
a complete storyline that might be connected to the larger 
campaign's plot arc. Playing an adventure spans one or 
more game sessions—times during which the group plays 
a part of the adventure over the course of several hours. 
PREPARING TO PLAYTEST
In the Pathfinder Playtest, we ask that you run our 
playtest adventure, Doomsday Dawn, which you can find 
at paizo.com or your local game store or bookstore. The 
adventure, along with the Pathfinder Playtest Bestiary PDF,  includes story and NPCs for the narrative parts of the 
game, plus all the locations, maps, and foes for exploration 
and encounters. Each part of this seven-part adventure is 
designed to test something different. You can also participate 
by running the Pathfinder Society's playtest scenarios and 
quests. By playing through these adventures, you'll help test 
the game so we can improve it before the final release. SURVEY
SAfter you run the different sections of the playtest adventure, you and your players can help us immensely by filling out the surveys available at paizo.com. GAME MASTERING327don't do this unilaterally! You're informed by the setting's 
backstory, your preparations, and the suggestions and 
assumptions the other players bring to the table. Keep in 
mind that until you announce something, any plan is subject 
to change. Even if you decided the owner of the tavern is 
kindly with good intentions, you might want to change her 
into an agent of evil if a player misreads her and comes up 
with an interesting conspiracy theory that's more fun.
You'll also determine when PCs and their foes need to 
attempt rolls, and you determine the consequences of those 
rolls and anything that doesn't require a roll. This comes up 
most often outside of encounters, since encounters are more 
regimented about when rolls happen. In an encounter, a 
character can usually pilot her own turn, with you chiming 
in only to say whether an attack hits or if something in the 
environment requires someone to attempt a check. As you're running, keep track of where you're shining 
the spotlight. It can be easy to keep attention on the most 
outgoing player or character, but you need to check in 
with all the characters. If it's been a while since someone 
has contributed, stop and ask, "What's your character up 
to at this point?" If the player's not sure, add a detail or 
character to the scene the character might find interesting. 
ADJUDICATING THE RULES
As the GM, you are responsible for solving any rules 
disputes. Remember that keeping your game moving takes 
precedence over being a hundred percent correct. Looking 
up rules at the table can slow the game down, so in many 
cases you'll be making your best guess rather than scouring 
the book for the exact rules. (It can be instructive to look 
those rules up during a break or after the session, though!)
To help make calls on the fly, use the following guidelines 
the game rules are based on. You might want to keep 
printouts of these guidelines and Table 10–2: Skill DCs by 
Level and Difficulty (see page 337) close for quick reference.

Ł If you don't know how long a quick task takes, go with 1 action.

Ł If you're not sure what action a task uses, look for the 
most similar basic action. If you don't find one you like, 
use a generic action and add any necessary traits (typically attack, concentrate, manipulate, or move).

Ł When two sides are opposed, have one roll against the 
other's DC. Don't have both sides roll. The one who rolls 
is usually the one acting. (Initiative is an exception, and 
saving throws are another.)

Ł If you're making up an Effect, creatures should be 
incapacitated or killed only on a critical success (or a critical 
failure, for a saving throw).

Ł If something improves or lowers chances of success, give a 
+1 circumstance bonus or –1 circumstance penalty.

Ł If you're not sure how difficult something significant should 
be, use a high-difficulty DC for the party's level.

Ł If you don't know what check to use, pick the most 
appropriate skill.

Ł If no skill applies to a check to Recall Knowledge, use the 
Lore skill (which will usually be untrained).

Ł Use the characters' daily preparations as the time to reset 
anything that lasts roughly a day.

Ł When a character accomplishes something noteworthy 
that doesn't have rules for XP, award the group 10 to 30 XP.
ADDING ADDITIONAL OPTIONS
Some sections of this book indicate that you might grant 
access to additional options at your discretion (such as 
when determining whether to allow characters to purchase 
items outside the Equipment chapter as starting gear). 
If you feel confident that allowing a character to take a 
particular option will be a good addition to your game, 
then go for it! If you're uncertain or worried about a 
request, you don't have to allow it, and that is your call 
to make. However, try to meet players halfway or suggest 
alternatives if you can. If you want to allow an option on a 
trial basis but are worried it might become a problem later, 
you can always talk to the player beforehand and explain 
that you are tentatively allowing the option but might have 
to change your decision later after you see it in play.
SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCE
S AND
 TRAIT
SYou might find that a situation suggests a task should be 
easier or harder than expected by the rules or adventure. In 
these cases, you can always create a circumstance bonus or 
penalty to reflect this. Usually, this is +1 or –1 for a minor 
but significant circumstance, but you can go up to +2 or –2 
for a major circumstance. The maximum bonus or penalty, 
+4 or –4, should apply only if someone is trying something 
extremely foolhardy or unlikely but not quite impossible. You can also add traits that should apply. Let's say during 
a fight, Seelah dips her sword into a brazier of hot coals, then 
swings it at an enemy that's weak against fire. You could add 
the fire trait to this attack if you see fit. Note that getting an 
advantage in this way should usually require an action, so 
Seelah would get the benefit for one attack, but to do it again 
she'd need to bury her sword in the coals once more. SHARING RESPONSIBILITYJust because you're the GM and ostensibly in charge doesn't mean 
you have to do all the extra work to make the campaign run. Some 
of the tasks described here, like scheduling games, taking notes, 
and giving recaps, can be delegated to other players. You might 
also have someone track initiative or the Hit Points of the PCs' 
foes for you in encounters, or even run those foes if you have 
a large group and someone would rather do that than control a 
character of their own.
It's also great when someone else can host a session, provide 
snacks for the group, or take on other responsibilities that aren't 
directly related to the game. It's best to figure out a schedule of 
responsibilities when you're first setting up a game. Ask the players 
what they're willing to take on. If you start to feel overwhelmed 
halfway through a campaign, you can revisit the topic and try out 
new options until you find a setup that's comfortable.
328 As is discussed in Chapter 9, sessions of Pathfinder can be divided up into three different kinds of activity, or modes 
of play.
The encounter mode of play takes place in real time or slower, and involves direct engagement between players 
and enemies, potential allies, or each other. Combat and 
social interaction usually take place in encounter mode. The connective tissue of an adventure, exploration mode, is used when characters are exploring a location 
where there's uncertainty or danger, such as an unfamiliar 
city or a dungeon. In exploration mode, characters aren't in immediate peril, but they must still be on 
their toes. Exploration and encounters are collectively called adventuring. When the characters aren't out adventuring, the party 
is in downtime mode. This mode covers most of a normal person's life, such as mundane, day-to-day tasks and 
working toward long-term goals. ENCOUNTERSBecause encounter mode is the most tightly regimented 
mode of play, you'll mostly be following the rules presented 
in Chapter 9. Because you usually call for initiative during 
exploration mode before transitioning into encounter mode, 
guidelines for determining initiative order appear on page 
331 as part of the GMing advice about exploration mode. 
Rules for building balanced combat encounters appear in 
the Pathfinder Playtest Bestiary, available at paizo.com. Stakes Moderate to high. Encounters always have 
significant stakes, and they are played out in a slow time 
frame to reflect that. 
Time Scale Encounter mode moves at a regimented pace, 
proceeding in combat rounds for combat encounters and 
any other length of rounds you decide is appropriate for 
other sorts of encounters. In combat, 1 minute consists 
of 10 rounds, so a combat round is 6 seconds long, but 
you might, for example, decide a verbal duel proceeds in 
minute-long rounds to give each speaker enough time to 
make a solid point. Actions and Reactions
 Combat encounters are broken into 
discrete actions, and characters can use reactions when 
their triggers occur. Reactions can occur in social situations, 
though their triggers are usually more descriptive and less 
tactical, allowing you and the other players more fiexibility.
CHOO
SING ADVERSARIE
S' 
ACTION
SPlayers often coordinate and plan to be as efficient as 
possible, but their adversaries don't always. As the GM, 
you're roleplaying these foes, including deciding their 
tactics. Most creatures have a basic grasp of tactics like 
flanking or focusing on a single target. Yet, you should 
remember that they have emotional reactions and make 
mistakes, even more so than the player characters. Use adversaries' knowledge about the situation when 
selecting targets or choosing which abilities to use, not 
your own. You might know that the cleric has a really 
high Will modifier, but a monster might still try to use 
a fear ability on her. That's not to say you should play 
adversaries as complete fools. They can learn from their 
mistakes and make sound plans, and smarter villains 
might research the player characters in advance. Adversaries typically stop attacking someone who's 
knocked out. Even if a creature knows a fallen character might come back into the fight, only the most vicious creatures focus on helpless foes rather than the more immediate threats around them. Running adversaries is a mix of being true to the 
creature and doing what's best for the drama of the game. 
Think of it like a movie or a fight scene in a novel. If the 
fighter taunts a fire giant to draw its attention away from 
the fragile wizard, it still might be tactically more sound 
for the giant to keep pummeling the wizard. Ask yourself 
whether that's the best choice for the scene, or whether 
you'd rather have a scene in which the giant redirects its 
ire to the infuriating fighter.
ENDING ENCOUNTERSA combat encounter typically ends when all the creatures 
on one side are killed or knocked unconscious. Once 
this happens, you can stop acting in initiative order. The 
surviving side then typically has ample time to ensure that 
everyone it took out stays down. You might need to keep 
using encounter rounds if any members of the winning 
side are near death, clinging to a cliff, or in some other 
place where every moment matters for their survival. You can call a fight over if there's no challenge left and 
the player characters are just cleaning up the last few weak 
enemies. However, avoid doing this if any of the players 
still have inventive and interesting things they want to try 
or spells they're concentrating on—ending an encounter 
early is a tool to avoid boredom, and isn't meant to deny 
someone their fun. You can call a fight early in several 
ways: having the foes surrender, having damage kill an 
adversary before its Hit Points actually run out, or simply 
saying the battle's over and that the PCs easily dispatch 
their remaining foes. One side might surrender once almost all its members are defeated or if spells or skills demoralize them 
thoroughly. Once there's a surrender, come out of 
initiative order and enter into a short negotiation. The surrendering side doesn't have much leverage, so avoid 
going too deep into back-and-forth discussions. Such 
conversations are really about whether the winners will 
give any concessions or just kill the losers. Fleeing enemies can be a problem. Player characters 
often want to pursue anyone who's fleeing if they think 
that enemy might come back to be a threat later on. Avoid 
playing this out move by move—it can easily bog down the 
game. If every adversary is fleeing, forgo initiative order 
RUNNING MODES OF PLAY
329and give each PC the option to pursue any one fleeing foe. 
The PC can declare one spell, action, or other ability to 
use to try to keep up. Then, compare the PC's Speed to 
that of the target, assess how much the pursuer's chosen 
spell or ability would help, and factor in any abilities the 
quarry has that would aid escape. If you determine that 
the pursuer catches up, go back into combat with the 
original initiative order. If not, the quarry escapes for now.
EXPLORATION
Unlike in encounters, you'll be making judgment calls on 
just about everything that happens during exploration 
mode. Exploration is intentionally less regimented than 
encounter mode. It's especially important to form a clear 
mental picture of the group's surroundings. You can 
use this to keep track of where the players are, and to 
describe the sights, sounds, and other sensations of their 
adventuring locales. Fundamentally, exploration is all about rewarding the 
PCs for learning about their surroundings. Encourage the 
players to have their characters truly explore, and reward 
their curiosity. The things they try to do in exploration 
mode show you what they're interested in and what they 
consider important. As you play, you'll get a good feel for 
what aspects of exploration intrigue certain players, and 
you can add more of those things to your adventures or 
emphasize these points in published adventures. Stakes Low to moderate. Exploration mode should be used 
when there's some amount of risk, but no immediate danger. 
The PCs might be in an environment where they're likely to 
face monsters or hazards, but they usually stay in exploration 
mode until they enter a fight or another direct interaction. 
Time Scale When the PCs are in exploration mode, time in 
the game world passes much faster than real-world time at 
the table, so it's rarely measured out to the second or the 
minute. You can speed up or slow down how quickly things 
are happening as needed. If it's important to know exactly 
how much time is passing, you can usually estimate time 
spent in exploration mode to within 10 minutes.
Actions and Reactions
 Though exploration's not broken into 
rounds, the exploration tactics assume the PCs are spending 
part of their time taking actions. If they have specific actions 
they want to take, they should ask you, and you can decide 
whether it's relevant and whether to switch to encounter 
mode for greater detail. PCs can take any relevant reactions 
that come up.
EXPLORATION TACTICS
In exploration mode, each player chooses an exploration 
tactic for her character. The most common tactics are 
searching, sneaking, hustling, and detecting magic. While 
players will usually hew close to the following default 
actions, it's important to allow each player to describe 
their character's actions. There's no need for players to 
memorize the exploration tactics and use them exactly. 
Instead, they can describe what they're doing, and then you determine which tactic applies. This also means 
you can determine how a tactic works if the character's 
actions are unique. To determine which tactic applies, use the following 
guidelines. A tactic like wandering or sneaking, which 
doesn't cause fatigue, consists of a single action repeated 
roughly 10 times per minute (such as sneaking using 
Sneak 10 times) or an alternation of actions that works 
out similarly (such as searching's alternation of Stride 
and Seek).A fatiguing tactic, such as hustling, causes fatigue after 10 minutes. A fatiguing tactic is typically composed of actions at a quicker pace, such that the character takes roughly 20 actions per minute (for hustling, that's 20 
Stride actions). Any tactic involving spellcasting causes fatigue after 10 minutes even if it doesn't take as many 
actions. Someone who's Concentrating on a Spell but not 
moving still gets fatigued. You might find that a player wants to do something 
equivalent to spending 3 actions every 6 seconds, just 
like she would in combat. This is possible in combat 
only because combat lasts such a short time, and is not 
sustainable over the longer time frame of exploration. If 
someone tries to do this in exploration, it's best to say no. 
If pressed, have the tactic cause fatigue after 2 minutes. Sometimes the group might stop a fatiguing tactic 
before getting fatigued, then resume the fatiguing tactic. 
You can reset the 10-minute timer for fatigue's onset if the 
group spent a reasonable amount of time on less strenuous 
activities. As a rule of thumb, the characters should spend 
about as much time on non-fatiguing tactics as they did 
on the fatiguing tactic for the timer to reset. TYPICAL TACTICS
The following exploration tactics are fully detailed on page 316 
of Chapter 9.
Ł Casting a spell (fatiguing)

Ł Concentrating on a spell (fatiguing)

Ł Covering tracks

Ł Defending
Ł Detecting magic
Ł Following tracks

Ł Hustling (fatiguing)

Ł Investigating

Ł Searching

Ł Sneaking
Ł Wandering
These social tactics are primarily useful in social situations rather 
than when exploring dungeons or wilderness.

Ł Carousing

Ł Conversing

Ł Looking out

Ł Shopping
Ł Stealing (fatiguing)
330
The following sections discuss tactics that require 
additional adjudication from you beyond the guidelines 
for players detailed on pages 316–317 of Chapter 9.Conversing
This tactic isn't necessary for banter during exploration, 
but if a character wants to attempt verbal Deception, 
Diplomacy, or Intimidation checks, she needs to use 
this tactic. Conversing usually involves staying in one 
location. In circumstances where it is warranted, however, 
conversing can be combined with wandering to converse 
on the go, although the conversation takes twice as long. Detecting MagicThis tactic doesn't enable characters to automatically find 
every single magical aura or object during travel. As noted 
in their respective rules, illusions and magic traps of a high 
enough level can't be found with 
detect magic. When characters find something magical using this 
tactic, let them know and give them the option to stop 
and explore further or to continue moving on. Stopping 
brings you into a more roleplay-heavy scene, where 
players can search through an area, assess different items, 
or otherwise try to figure out the source of the magic and 
what it does. Continuing on might cause the group to miss 
out on beneficial magic items or face the consequences of 
triggering a magic trap. Following Tracks
The DC guidelines for tracking are on page 338. Choose 
the terrain most similar to the one the group is traveling 
through to set the level of the check. You can adjust the 
level if you feel those guidelines don't match the specific 
terrain the group is in. For instance, dirt is level 1 to 
represent flat, dusty plains, but you could use level 0 for 
loose dirt, like tilled farmlands. Larger creatures or big 
groups of creatures lower the difficulty, whereas smaller 
creatures, inclement weather, or old tracks increase it. You 
typically don't use the statistics of the quarry unless that 
creature is concealing its tracks (in which case you use its 
Survival DC). 
Investigating
As with searching or detecting magic, the initial result of 
investigating is usually enough to give the investigator 
a clue, but it leads into a more thorough examination 
rather than giving all possible information. For instance, 
a character might note that the walls of a dungeon are 
covered with Abyssal writing, but would need to stop to 
read the text or discover that it's written in blood.
Searching
A successful Perception check while searching lets a 
character notice the presence or absence of something 
unusual in the area, but it doesn't provide a comprehensive 
catalog of everything there. Instead, it provides a jumping-MONITORING SPELL DURATIONS
The durations of spells are approximate values that boil down 
the vagaries and eccentricities of magic to a convenient value. 
However, that doesn't mean you can set your watch by a spell 
with a 1-hour duration. This is one of the reasons tracking the 
passage of time outside of encounters is in your hands rather 
than being as precise as encounter rounds. If a question arises 
about whether a spell has expired, you make the call. You 
shouldn't be punitive, but you also shouldn't treat characters 
like they move with clockwork precision and perfect efficiency 
between encounters.
The two main times these durations will matter are when 
players try to fit multiple encounters within the duration of a spell 
and when they want to use a spell before a fight and keep it in 
Effect during the encounter.
MULTIPLE ENCOUNTERS
A 1-minute spell should last for multiple encounters only if the encounters happen in very close proximity (usually in one room 
and its adjoining room) and if the characters go directly from one 
fight to the next. If they want to stop and heal themselves, or 
even if the party wants to debate whether to go on to the next 
fight before the spell expires, that's enough time lost that the spell 
runs out. Be more generous with spells lasting 10 minutes or more. A 
10-minute spell lasts for one encounter, and possibly one more if 
the locations are fairly close together. A 1-hour spell usually lasts 
for several encounters. These also depend on how much time the 
characters spend on other things between encounters.
BEFORE A FIGHTCasting spells before a fight (sometimes called "pre-buffing") 
gives the characters a big advantage, since then they can spend 
more combat rounds on oflensive actions rather than preparatory 
ones. Having a starting advantage should feel like an advantage. 
Usually, you can let each character cast one spell or prepare in 
some similar way if they have the drop on their foes. Then they 
should roll initiative.
In many cases, the act of casting spells can give away the 
party's presence. For instance, if the characters were all hidden 
behind a barricade, the noise and gesticulation of spellcasting 
might still alert their foes, whereas doing so in a separate closed 
room wouldn't. In cases where the PCs' preparations could give 
them away, you might roll for initiative before everyone can 
complete their preparations. Casting preparatory spells before 
combat becomes a problem when it feels rote and the players can 
assume it will always work. That sort of planning can't hold up in 
every situation!
331off point for closer inspection or an encounter. For instance, 
if an area has both a DC 30 secret door and a DC 25 
trap, and a character got a result of 28, you would tell 
the searching player that her character noticed something 
unusual in the area and give a clue about the presence of 
the trap, but the party needs to examine the area more to 
learn more about the trap and would need to try searching 
again to have another chance to find the secret door.
If an area contains something that will take a long 
time to search (such as a filing cabinet full of papers), the 
search exploration tactic would reveal the cabinet, but the 
PCs would have to search the cabinet more closely to read 
the papers. This typically requires the party to halt for a 
complete search. To be absolutely certain of having a chance to detect 
any hazard or secret before walking into it requires an 
overland Speed no more than 100 feet per minute (1 mile 
per hour). If the group moves faster than that, a searching 
character should get a chance to attempt a Perception 
check to detect any secret that's in a place that stands out 
(such as near a door or a turn in a corridor), but not one 
that's in a more inconspicuous place (like a random point 
in a long hallway). If more than one character is searching, 
give the group a chance to detect anything that's hidden, 
using the skill bonus of the character with the highest 
bonus for whatever is hardest to notice. Wandering
If a player doesn't state anything special for her character 
to be doing and is just going along with the group, that 
character is wandering. 
SETTING A PARTY ORDER
In exploration mode, it often matters which characters 
are in the front or back of the party formation. Have the 
players decide between themselves where in the group 
their characters are while exploring. Their order can 
determine who gets attacked first when enemies or traps 
threaten them from various directions. It's up to you to 
determine the specifics of how this works based on the 
situation's unique circumstances.
When you come out of exploration mode, the group 
usually remains in the same general formation. Decide 
the PCs' exact positions with their input if you're moving 
to a grid (as usually happens at the start of a combat 
encounter). If they come out of exploration mode on 
their own terms, they can move around as they see fit. 
For example, if they detect a trap and the rogue is going 
to attempt to disarm it, the other characters can move to 
whatever locations they think are safe. HAZARD
SExploration might get broken up by traps or other hazards 
(see Hazards on page 341). Simple hazards usually pose 
a threat to the PCs only once and can be dealt with in 
exploration mode. Complex hazards require jumping into 
encounter mode until the hazard is dealt with. PCs have 
a better chance of detecting hazards if they're using the 
searching tactic (and the detecting magic tactic, in the case 
of some magic traps). Disabling a trap or overcoming a 
hazard usually takes place in encounter mode. 
ROLLING INITIATIVE
Transitioning from exploration to an encounter usually 
involves rolling for initiative. Call for initiative once a trap 
is triggered or a creature on either side decides to take 
action against someone on the other side, or as soon as the 
two sides come into contact. When to roll initiative is best 
explained with a few examples.
Ł A group of PCs are exploring a cavern. They enter a narrow 
passage patrolled by a group of kobold warriors. Now that 
the two groups are in the same area, you should have them 
roll initiative.

Ł Merisiel and Kyra have been captured and are negotiating 
with the kobold king. Things aren't going well, so Merisiel 
decides she'll launch a surprise attack against the king. As 
soon as she says this is her plan, you call for initiative. 

Ł Amiri and a kobold champion agree to have a friendly 
wrestling contest. They square off on a patch of dirt, and 
you call for them to roll initiative using Athletics. 

Ł Harsk and Ezren are trying to Balance across a narrow beam 
in order to reach an isolated boulder where the kobolds keep 
their treasure. When they get halfway across, a red dragon 
fiies down from the mountain to attack! As soon as the 
dragon makes its appearance, you call for an initiative roll.
Initiative after Reactions
In some cases, a trap or a foe has a reaction that tells you to roll initiative. For instance, a complex trap that's 
triggered might make an attack with its reaction before the initiative order begins. In these cases, resolve all the results of the reaction before calling for initiative rolls. 
This means it's possible that the trap or creature with the 
reaction might get to go again immediately if it's at the 
top of the initiative order.
Choosing the Type of Roll
When choosing what type of roll to use when determining 
initiative, lean toward the most obvious choice. The most 
common roll is Perception; this is what the kobold warriors 
would use in the first example above, as would Kyra and the 
kobold king. The next most common skills to use are Stealth 
(for sneaking up, like a rogue in the first example and the 
dragon in the last example above) and Deception (for 
tricking opponents, like Merisiel in the second example). For 
social contests, it's common to use Deception, Diplomacy, 
Intimidation, Performance, or Society. If you're unsure what 
type of check to call for, use Perception.
You can allow individual players to make a case that 
they should use a different skill than Perception, but only 
if it's based on something they established beforehand. For 
example, if in the prelude to the attack, Merisiel's player had 
332said, "I'm going to dangle down off the chandelier to get 
the drop on them," you could let her use Acrobatics for her 
initiative roll. If she just said, "Hey, I want to attack these 
guys. Can I use Acrobatics?" without having established a 
reason and because she's better at it, you probably shouldn't 
let her do so. RESTING
Properly resting requires 8 hours of sleep. Though resting 
typically happens at night, a group gains the same benefits 
for resting during the day, but it can gain them no more than 
once every 24 hours. A character who rests for a full night 
recovers in the following ways naturally. 

Ł The character regains Hit Points equal to their Constitution 
modifier times their level, with a minimum equal to your level. 
If they rest without any form of shelter or comfort, you might 
want to reduce this healing to an amount equal to half the 
character's level (minimum 1).

Ł The character loses the fatigued condition.

Ł The character reduces the severity of the drained condition 
by 1.

Ł Most spellcasters need to rest before they regain their spells 
for the day.

Ł The character recovers Resonance Points, Spell Points, and 
similar pools. A group in exploration mode can attempt to rest, but they 
aren't entirely safe from danger. Interruptions can prevent 
characters from getting a full night of rest. Usually, after an 
interruption, characters can go back to sleep and get a full 
8 hours of rest at the price of getting a later start on the 
following day.
Sleeping in armor results in poor rest and causes you to 
wake up fatigued. If you would have recovered from fatigue 
during the night, sleeping in armor negates that benefit. If a character goes more than 16 hours without going to 
sleep, they become fatigued. Taking long-term rest for faster recovery is part of 
downtime, and can't be done if a character is in a dangerous 
environment. See page 334 for these rules. Watches and Surprise Attacks
Groups usually put a few people on guard to watch out 
for danger while the others rest. Spending time on watch 
also interrupts sleep, so a night's schedule needs to account 
for everyone's time on guard duty. Table 10–1 indicates 
how long the group needs to set aside for rest based on 
everyone in the group getting a rotating watch assignment 
of equal length. If a surprise encounter would occur during rest, you can 
roll a die to randomly determine which character is on watch 
at the time of the encounter. All characters roll initiative, 
with sleeping characters typically rolling Perception with 
the –4 penalty for being asleep. They don't automatically 
wake up when rolling initiative, but might get a check to 
wake up at the start of their turns as normal. If a savvy 
enemy waits for a particularly vulnerable character to take 
watch before attacking, you can have the attack happen 
on that character's watch automatically. However, you 
might have the ambusher attempt a Stealth check against 
the Perception DCs of the party to see if anyone noticed 
his approach. TABLE 10–1: WATCHES AND REST
Group 
Size
Total Rest Hours
Duration of Each Watch
216 hours8 hours312 hours4 hours410 hours, 40 minutes2 hours, 40 minutes510 hours2 hours69 hours, 36 minutes1 hour, 36 minutes
DAILY PREPARATIONSWhen initially setting out to explore, or after a night's 
rest, the PCs spend time to prepare for the adventuring 
day over the span of 30 minutes to an hour. This typically 
happens in the morning, but always after 8 full hours of 
rest. Daily preparations include the following.
Ł Spellcasters who prepare spells need to spend time 
choosing which spells they'll use that day.

Ł Resonance Points, Spell Points, and other Effects and 
abilities that reset during preparation all reset at this point. 
This includes abilities that can be used a certain number of 
times per day.

Ł Each character equips their gear. This includes donning 
their armor and strapping on their weapons.

Ł Characters invest magic items to use the items' magical 
abilities for the day, as described on page 377.
ADVERSE TERRAIN AND WEATHER
Progress in exploration mode gets slower when the party 
faces dense jungles, deep snow, sandstorms, extreme 
heat, or similar difficult conditions. You decide how 
much these factors impact the progress of the characters. 
Specific effects of certain types of terrain and weather are 
described starting on page 340.Difficult terrain such as thick undergrowth usually slows 
down progress and requires care, but it doesn't damage 
the characters. Unless it's important how far the group 
gets in a particular time frame, this can be covered with a 
quick statement about how difficult it is to chop through 
the vines or trudge through the bog. If the characters are 
on a deadline, adjust their progress on Table 9–2: Travel 
Speed (see page 316), typically cutting it in half if almost 
all of the land is difficult terrain or to one-third for greater 
difficult terrain. Hazardous terrain, such as the caldera of an active 
volcano, might physically harm the player characters. In 
exploration, you can give the group the option to route 
around hazardous terrain or travel directly through it—although in some cases, they might not be able to go 
around. You can move into a more detailed scene when 
the characters move through hazardous terrain. As they 
333attempt to mitigate the damage with spells or skill checks. 
If they endure hazardous terrain, consider giving the PCs 
a minor XP reward at the end of their exploration, with a slight increase if they took smart precautions to avoid taking damage. Dangerous crevasses, swampy bogs, quicksand, and 
similar dangers are environmental hazards, which are 
described in the Pathfinder Playtest Bestiary. Uncomfortable conditions like cold, heat, or heavy rain 
can cause fatigue. In most cases, these conditions reduce the 
interval it takes to become fatigued to 4 hours (or 5 minutes 
for someone using a fatiguing exploration tactic). Extreme 
cold, heat, or pervasive smoke causes PCs to take damage 
every hour of exploration. Full details appear on page 341.Some types of terrain and weather conditions impose 
penalties on skills. For example, a thick fog makes it 
harder to use Perception relating to vision. You choose 
the circumstance penalty, ranging from –1 for a minor 
imposition to –4 for a truly debilitating one. A light fog 
might impose only a –1 circumstance penalty on those 
skill checks, while unnaturally thick fog might impose a 
–4 circumstance penalty. 
DOWNTIME
In downtime, you can sum up the important events of 
a whole day with just one roll. Use this mode when the 
characters return to their home base or otherwise have 
some time off for adventuring. Usually, you'll cover downtime in a few minutes at the 
start of a session, or as a break between finishing one part 
of an adventure and another. As with exploration, you 
might punctuate downtime with roleplaying or encounters 
when it's natural to do so.
This section describes how long-term rest and retraining 
works. Most other downtime activities appear under skills; 
a number of other common downtime activities and their 
associated skills are listed below. See the relevant skills for 
full details.
Ł Learn an Arcane Spell (Arcana)

Ł Craft (Crafting)

Ł Gather Information (Diplomacy)

Ł Practice a Trade (Lore)

Ł Treat Disease (Medicine)

Ł Stage a Performance (Performance)

Ł Create Forgery (Society)

Ł Survive in the Wild (Survival)
Stakes None to low. Downtime is the counterpart to 
adventuring and covers low-risk activities.
Time Scale Downtime can last days, weeks, months, or years in 
the game world, while taking no more than a few minutes in 
real time.
Actions and Reactions
 If you need to use actions and 
reactions, switch to exploration or encounter mode. A 
creature that can't act is unable to perform most downtime 
activities, but can take long-term rest.
PLAYING OUT A DOWNTIME DAY
At the start of a given day of downtime, have all the players declare what their characters are trying to accomplish that 
day. You can then go character by character (or group by 
group, if some are working together). Some downtime 
activities, such as Practicing a Trade, just require a simple 
roll with some embellishment from you and the player. 
Other activities might be more specific and involved, incorporating encounters or exploration scenes. You can 
call on the players to play out their downtime activities in any order, though it's usually best to do the simplest ones 
first. Players who aren't a part of a more involved activity 
might have time to take a break from the table while the more complex activities are played out. If any characters feel like performing their daily preparations, they can do so, just like they would on a day 
of exploration. It's usually best to have players establish 
a standard set of preparations so you can assume the characters always go through the same routine every day unless their players say otherwise. Cooperation
Multiple characters can cooperate on the same task. If it's 
a simpler task that just requires a roll, treat this as though 
all of the characters but one were using the Aid action. 
If it's a complex task, treat this as all of them working 
on different parts of it at a time, so all their efforts count 
toward its completion. ChecksSome downtime activities require rolls—typically skill 
checks. Because these rolls represent the culmination 
of a series of tasks, players usually can't use abilities 
or spells to manipulate the roll, such as activating an 
item to gain a bonus or casting a fortune spell to roll 
twice. Constant benefits still apply, so someone might 
invest or employ a magic item that gives them a bonus 
to their check without being activated. You might make 
specific exceptions to this rule. If something could apply 
constantly, or so often that it might as well be constant, 
it's more likely it can be used on downtime checks.
LONGER PERIODS OF DOWNTIME
Running downtime when the group has a long time off—like several weeks, months, or even years—can be more challenging. However, it's also an opportunity for 
the characters to make progress toward long-term plans 
rather than worrying about day-to-day activities. Because they have so much time to work with, characters don't 
roll a check for each day. Instead, they deal with a few 
special goals or events, average out their results for the 
rest of the downtime, and pay for their cost of living. Events
After you find out what the characters will try to achieve 
in their downtime, select a few standout events for each 
334of them, usually one event for a week or month, or four 
events for a year or longer. These events should be tailored 
to each character and their specific goals, and can serve as 
hooks for later adventures or plot development. Examples of downtime events include the following. 
Staging a Performance could include producing command 
performances of a new play for visiting nobility. Crafting 
could consist of completing a special item commissioned 
by a client. Practicing a Trade could mean tackling a 
major task that needs a quick turnaround. Activities that aren't covered here should have events 
that fit them, with you choosing the relevant skill and 
DC. For example, if a character intended to build his own 
library to house his books on magic, you might decide 
setting the foundation and organizing the library once 
construction is finished are major events. The first could 
be a Crafting check, and the second an Arcana check. Not all the tasks need to be very detailed or precisely 
defined. It's generally okay to gloss over specific details 
during downtime. Average Progress
Deduct the number of days used for events from the total 
days of downtime before you figure out the progress the 
characters make toward their goals on the remaining days.
For tasks that require daily rolls, such as Practicing a Trade or Staging a Performance, treat the remaining 
days as though the character had rolled a 10 on their checks and multiply the result by the number of days. To set the level of an audience or task for these days, use 
the lowest level the character would reliably be able to find in the place where they spend their downtime (see Difficulty Classes on page 336 for more on setting levels 
for DCs). During long stretches of downtime, events and 
goals should typically feature higher-level audiences and 
tasks than the PCs might find impromptu. For instance, a character Practicing a Trade with Sailing Lore for 
4 months might work at a port doing 1st-level tasks most of the time, but have a week of 3rd-level tasks to account for busy periods. A character skilled at Crafting might want to spend 
their downtime making money by crafting items. This 
works like Practicing a Trade. Have the character attempt 
their check using their Crafting skill modifier instead of 
their Lore skill modifier to determine their profit. If the 
character also wants to make specific items to use while 
adventuring, they spend the required number of days to 
Craft as normal and can then use the remaining days for 
Practicing a Trade.
COST OF LIVING
For short periods of downtime, characters are usually just 
passing through or spending a bit of time in a settlement. 
They can use the prices for inn stays and meals found on 
page 188. For long segments of downtime, use the values 
on the Cost of Living table on page 188. Deduct these 
costs from the character's funds after they gain any money 
from their other downtime activities. A character can live off the land rather than pay, but 
each day they do so requires using Survive in the Wild (see 
pages 158–159) or Subsist on the Streets (see page 157) to 
the exclusion of any other downtime activity.
BUYING AND SELLING
After an adventure yields a windfall, the characters 
might have a substantial number of items they want to 
sell. Likewise, they might want to stock up on gear when 
they're flush with cash. It usually takes 1 day of downtime 
to sell off a few goods or to shop around to buy a couple 
items. It can take longer to sell off sizable numbers of 
goods or multiples of items that aren't in high demand.
This assumes the characters are at a settlement of 
decent size during their downtime. In some cases, they 
might need to spend day in travel to reach bigger cities. 
As always, you have final say in what sort of shops and 
items are available. 
LONG-TERM REST
Each full day a character spends resting during downtime 
allows them to recover double what they normally would 
for a night's rest. They must spend this time resting in a 
comfortable and secure location, typically in bed. If they spend significantly longer in bed rest—usually 
a few days to a week of downtime—they recover 
from all damage, plus the fatigued, unconscious, and 
drained conditions. Characters affected by diseases or 
long-lasting poisons might need to continue attempting 
saves during downtime. Apart from these and curses, 
permanent injuries, and a few other detriments that 
require magic or special care to remove, a character 
recovers from all conditions and damage during long-term rest. A character can also reduce her enervated condition 
by spending her downtime training, as described in the condition. 
RETRAINING
By spending significant amounts of downtime—usually 
a week or more—a player can change some of the 
choices she made for her character. Retraining usually 
requires spending time learning from a teacher, whether 
undergoing physical training with them, studying at a 
library under their guidance, or falling into shared magical 
trances. You determine whether a character can get the 
proper training or whether something can be retrained at 
all. In some cases, a character might be able to find an 
instructor but need to pay for their services; this is most 
likely when the training in question involves learning a 
high-level technique, attaining legendary proficiency in a 
skill, or achieving similarly lofty goals. Anytime a character retrains something that was 
required for her other abilities, she's unable to use 
335those other abilities until she once more satisfies the 
prerequisites (she can instead opt to retrain those abilities 
as well). For instance, if she had a skill feat that required 
her to be an expert in Diplomacy and her retraining 
made her only trained in Diplomacy, she couldn't use 
the skill feat until she once more attained expert rank 
in Diplomacy; she is likely better off retraining the skill 
feat, too. A character cannot retrain her background or any 
heritage feats from her ancestry, since these are intrinsic 
parts of a character. However, she can retrain other 
ancestry feats. Feats
A character can spend a week of downtime to swap out 
one of her feats. She removes the old feat and replaces 
it with another of the same type. (For example, she 
could swap a skill feat for another skill feat, but not 
for a wizard feat.) She must choose a feat that she could 
have taken at the same level as the one she's losing, 
considering all factors at that level. For example, if she 
wants to trade out her 3rd-level feat and she was an 
expert in Stealth then, she can't take a feat that requires 
her to be a master of Stealth, even if she's now a master. 
If the player is unsure whether her character met the 
prerequisites of the feat she wants, she can't choose 
it. Note that if retraining other abilities means she is 
eligible to take a feat via retraining but doesn't currently 
meet its prerequisites, she cannot use that feat until she 
does. A character can't retrain heritage feats.
SkillsA character can spend a week of downtime to swap out 
one of his skill increases. He reduces his proficiency 
rank in the skill by one step and increases his proficiency 
rank in another skill by one step. The new proficiency 
rank has to be equal to or lower than the proficiency 
rank he traded away. For instance, if he was a master 
in Stealth, he could reduce that to an expert in Stealth 
to become a master in a skill he was an expert in, but 
not to become legendary in a skill he was a master in. 
Because the new arrangement of skills can influence 
his ability to retrain feats with skill prerequisites, the 
player should keep track of the level when the new skill 
increase occurred if he intends to retrain his feats based 
on the new skill. Class Features
A character can change a class feature that required a 
choice, taking a different choice instead. This lets her change a cleric domain or a wizard school, for example. Changing one of her class features can be complicated, and the time it takes is significant. You should decide on 
a case by case basis, but it always takes at least a month. Class features that are intrinsic parts of a character, like 
sorcerer bloodlines, can't be retrained.
336 As GM, it's up to you to set the difficulty classes (DCs) for 
rolls that don't use a predefined DC. The following sections 
offer advice on how to set appropriate DCs and tweak them 
as needed to feel natural for your story. 
CREATING APPROPRIATE CHALLENGES
As characters increase in level, they should face ever more 
deadly opponents and complex traps, seek out increasingly 
obscure information, and display increasing skill in many 
other areas. Such challenges increase in difficulty. 
DCs are determined partly by the level of a check, which 
is tied to the underlying task, and partly by the check's 
difficulty, which represents helpful or adverse circumstances. 
For example, crossing a river on a bridge is a different task 
from crossing on a log, and using a bridge is easier, so its 
level is lower. In contrast, crossing a bridge is the same task 
whether it's dry and well maintained or icy and crumbling, 
but the circumstances make the former easier and the latter 
more difficult. 
It's important that you don't simply make the DC 
arbitrarily higher or lower with the PCs' level. Any increase 
must be justified based on how the challenge actually 
increased, and thus how success is more impressive. For 
checks against opponents' DCs, higher-level adversaries 
have higher skills, so the players can clearly see improvement 
as they challenge and surpass more powerful foes. Many tasks are not opposed and have no reason to 
change in level. If you decide climbing the ordinary pine 
tree next to the temple is a level 0 task, climbing it doesn't 
arbitrarily get harder when the PCs are higher level; its level 
stays 0. If you need a task with a significantly higher DC to 
challenge your PCs, you should choose one that's inherently 
harder rather than artificially inflating the level of a simple 
task to increase its DC. For instance, when the PCs' level 
is relatively low, they might be faced with climbing a stone 
wall with handholds, but later in the campaign they should 
encounter tougher obstacles, like a smooth iron wall. 
ADJUSTING THE CHANCE OF SUCCESS
 When creating challenges at the PCs' level, use the 
following guidelines to determine what degree of difficulty 
is a good fit. Then consult Table 10–2: Skill DCs by Level 
and Difficulty to determine the appropriate DC. The table's 
Level column indicates the task level, while the subsequent 
columns present DCs for each difficulty.
Many tasks use the high-difficulty DC for their level, 
but circumstances adjust this. For trivial, low, and high 
DCs, a  character with the amount of skill described in the 
following paragraphs likely has a greater than 50% chance 
of success, thus allowing more critical successes. 
A trivial DC is so low that even the least-skilled character with a low score for the associated ability has around a 50% chance to succeed. These are good DCs for when a task is going to be rote for the more skilled members of the party; you can usually skip rolling and assume the characters succeed against trivial DCs. A low-difficulty DC is good to use when each PC will 
attempt the check and it matters how many succeed or fail, 
since it won't be too hard even for a character who doesn't 
have ranks in the skill or a high ability score. 
A high-difficulty skill DC can be overcome by a 
character who has increased their proficiency rank in a 
skill but doesn't have a high score in the associated ability 
(like if a typical rogue were attempting an Athletics check). 
This is the default difficulty in Pathfinder. High-difficulty 
DCs are a good choice for skill checks that require only 
one character succeed for the party to benefit. 
A severe-difficulty skill DC can test even a character 
proficient in the skill and who also has a high score in 
the associated ability. Use these DCs for contexts like a 
wizard attempting an Arcana check, a rogue attempting 
a Thievery check, or a cleric attempting a Religion check. An extreme-difficulty skill DC defeats even the most 
skilled characters most of the time, but it's just low enough 
that there's some chance of success. Use these DCs if you 
want success to be unlikely but not impossible. They're 
especially useful when a PC can attempt a check multiple 
times. You should avoid using them if a failed check results 
in death, massive harm, or other dire consequences. 
PROFICIENCY-GATED TASKS
 Sometimes succeeding at a particular task requires a higher 
proficiency rank than the base use of the associated skill. 
This is particularly common with Disable a Device, Pick a 
Lock, and Recall Knowledge. For instance, you might decide 
that knowing the details of a certain arcane theory isn't 
possible for anyone who's not trained in Arcana. However, 
you could allow someone untrained to try anyway; in this 
case, the PC could not succeed at the check but could still 
critically fail and gain erroneous information. Locks and 
traps often require a certain proficiency rank to successfully 
use the Pick a Lock or Disable a Device tasks of Thievery; a 
character whose proficiency rank is lower than what's listed 
can attempt the check, but can't succeed. 
For tasks that require a minimum proficiency, a level 2 or 
lower task should almost never require expert, a level 6 or 
lower task should almost never require master, and a level 
14 or lower task should almost never require legendary. If 
they did, no character of the appropriate level could succeed. 
ORDINARY TASKS
The Ordinary Tasks tables on page 338 list common 
tasks that don't increase in level. You can use them as 
benchmarks when deciding the levels of similar tasks. Each 
entry is followed by the task level, examples of factors that 
could impact difficulty, and the character level at which the 
task becomes so trivial that you can usually assume a PC 
succeeds rather than spending time on a roll. 
For most tasks that low-level, everyday NPCs might 
DIFFICULTY CLASSES
337attempt, the level of the check is 0–2. For example, using a 
log to cross a river is tricky but still reasonable for a normal 
person, so it's a high-difficulty level 1 check (DC 14). Based 
on that, you might decide that Balancing across a rickety 
bridge, which is easier for an ordinary person, is a high-difficulty level 0 Acrobatics check (DC 12). If the bridge 
or log were covered in moss, you might adjust to severe. The Difficulty Adjustments column includes factors that might alter the challenge. These are factors inherent to the task or the environment. Factors under the PCs' control, like gear grant them bonuses instead. Ordinary tasks become trivial at a certain level, listed in 
the final column so you have some idea when these tasks no 
longer present even a minor challenge for the characters. 
Some tasks are always trivial and have no need to be rolled, 
like climbing a ladder in ordinary circumstances. You can 
allow automatic successes at lower levels than listed if that 
makes your game run more smoothly.
ADJUDICATING COMMON SKILLS
The following skills frequently require DC judgment calls. CRAFTING
When a character Crafts an item, use the high-difficulty DC 
for the item's level as a baseline—for example, the DC for a 
common level 5 magic item is 21. If the item is uncommon, 
you might increase the difficulty to severe and rare to extreme. 
You can also adjust due to other circumstances such as using 
the low DC for a common item the PC has Crafted before. Repairing an item usually uses the low DC for the item's 
level, but it might increase to high for a magic item or an 
item of higher quality than you can Craft. 
GATHERING INFORMATION
To set the DC to Gather Information, use the notoriety of 
the subject to set the level and the depth of information to 
set the difficulty category. For example, if a character were 
trying to Gather Information about a visiting caravan, you 
might decide that a common person wouldn't know much 
about it but a merchant or city guard would, so it's level 
1 information. A caravan leader's name is superficial, so 
discovering it might be a low-difficulty level 1 check. If you 
were trying to learn the identity of the leader's employers, 
however, that might be a severe or extreme level 1 check, 
or higher level if they were particularly hidden. 
PERFORMANCE AND AUDIENCES
The Performance skill details the different levels of 
audiences a character can perform for. When setting 
the DC for these checks, you'll usually use the high DC 
corresponding to the audience's level. You can adjust this, 
of course, using the severe DC if an audience is rowdy or 
in a bad mood, for example. 
When determining what level of audience members a 
performer can find, in most settlements the character can 
scrounge up audiences of levels 0 and 1. A town typically 
allows at least one level 3 or level 4 audience, and a city has 
audiences with levels from 5–7. A performer typically must 
travel to a capital, metropolis, or court to find audiences 
of 9th level or higher, and might even need to entertain on 
another plane to find audiences of higher level than that. Successful performances often have additional benefits, like small circumstance bonuses on future Diplomacy checks against people who were in the audience. The performer might also secure access to higher-level 
audiences through word of mouth. 
PRACTICING A TRADE
The Lore skill lets characters try tasks of various levels. These 
usually use the high-difficulty DC for the task level unless 
some external factor adjusts it. For example, if a character uses 
Farming Lore to tend crops, you should use the low DC if their 
plot has fertile soil, but severe or extreme during a drought. When a character is using Lore to practice a trade, the task level depends greatly on whether the character's 
preferred sort of job is common or practical in the 
location. For example, in a town on a river, Sailing Lore 
might get you a level 1 task of piloting a raft, whereas a major seaport might have a level 4 task of working the sails on a flagship. The highest-level tasks might be 
available only at places where your Lore skill is highly lauded or in demand. Finding a task is also more difficult if the Lore skill in 
question is more obscure. If you have Owlbear Lore, you 
might be able to find only level 0 or level 1 tasks, if any. 
TABLE 10–2: SKILL DCS BY LEVEL AND DIFFICULTY
Level
Trivial
Low
HighSevere
Extreme
0910121417110121415182111315161931215171821413171920235141821222561519222326716202324278172124262991823262730101924272932112025283033122127303235132229323538142330333639152432353740162533363942172635384043182736394144192837404245202938414447213242454750223444474952233646495154338 TABLE 10–3: ORDINARY ACROBATICS TASKS
Task
Level
Dificulty Adjustments
Trivial
Balance on a fallen log1 Narrow, rotten, slippery
6 Squeeze through a crack
1 Oddly shaped, wet
6 Balance on a tightrope
3STrong breeze
9 TABLE 10–4: ORDINARY ATHLETICS TASKS
Task
Level
Dificulty Adjustments 
Trivial
Climb a tree
0 Few branches, fiexible, peeling bark
5 Swim in a lake
0 Choppy, placid
5 Swim in a river
1 Rocky, rushing
6 Swim in an ocean
1 Turbulent
6 Climb a rope
1 Braced against a wall, fraying
6 Climb a clifl2 Crumbling, slick, sloped8 Swim in a stormy ocean
5 Severe storm
13 TABLE 10–5: ORDINARY SOCIETY TASKS
Task
Level
Dificulty Adjustments 
Trivial
Identify a monarch
0 Obscure realm, ostentatious
5 Know proper forms of introduction
1 Complicated lineage
6 Subsist on the streets of a normal city
1 Authoritarian, dangerous, insular
6 Identify a minor noble2 Up-and-coming, secretive
8 TABLE 10–6: ORDINARY SURVIVAL TASKS
Task
Level
Dificulty Adjustments 
Trivial
Find fresh water
0 Dry spell5 Endure a cold night
1 Plentiful shelter, poor weather
6 Survive alone in ordinary conditions
1 Food scarcity, temperature, weather
6 Push through a storm
2 Frequent obstacles, whipping winds
8 Survive at high altitudes
3 Frigid wind
9 Tracking in mud or snow
0 Size of quarry, weather, age of tracks
5 Tracking in dirt
1 Size of quarry, weather, age of tracks
6 Tracking in grass, forest, or sand
2 Size of quarry, weather, age of tracks
8 Tracking on hard stone
4 Size of quarry, weather, age of tracks
11 RECALL
 KNO
WLEDGE
Using Recall Knowledge (with Arcana, Lore, Nature, 
Religion, or Society) works similarly to gathering 
information; use the level of notoriety to set the level and 
the depth of information to set the difficulty category.
Monster IdentificationIdentifying monster abilities is one of the most common uses of Recall Knowledge. The monster's commonality 
sets the difficulty: low for common monsters, high for 
uncommon, and severe for rare or unique. Most monsters' level should be the level of the DC, but you could reduce 
the level drastically for really famous monsters. A 
character who succeeds identifies the monster and singles out one of its best-known attributes—such as a troll's 
weakness to acid and fire or a manticore's tail spikes. On 
a critical success, the character gets that information plus something more subtle, like a demon's weakness or the 
trigger for a reaction. After a success, further uses of Recall Knowledge can 
yield more information, but you should increase the 
difficulty each time. Once a character has attempted 
an extreme-difficulty check or failed a check, further 
attempts are fruitless. Alternative Skills
Certain skills list Recall Knowledge, but it may sometimes make sense for you to allow someone to Recall Knowledge with a different skill. For instance, you might allow a Crafting check to Recall Knowledge regarding the quality of an item or a crafting material. 
TRAINING AN ANIMAL
Train Animal allows PCs to teach animals tricks. Use the 
level of the animal as the baseline and the complexity of the trick to determine difficulty. Particularly domesticated 
animals, like horses or cattle, can be treated as a lower level.339 Gradual improvement as characters continue to adventure 
is a core part of Pathfinder. The main ways characters get 
better are by earning experience—which they'll use to level 
up—and collecting treasure, like powerful magic items. EXPERIENCEAs they adventure, characters earn Experience Points 
(XP). These come from achieving goals, completing social 
encounters, exploring new places, fighting monsters, and 
any other sorts of accomplishments. You have a great deal 
of control over when the characters gain XP, though the 
following guidelines help you get a sense of what you're 
expected to give out in a standard campaign. At normal advancement, when a player character reaches 
1,000 XP or more, she levels up. She then reduces her XP 
by 1,000 and starts progressing toward the next level. 
XP AWARDS
Experience Points are awarded for combat and social 
encounters. Characters can also gain XP from exploration, 
such as finding secret areas or locating a foe's hideout. If 
the PCs face direct opposition, as is the case in a fight or 
a social conflict, the XP award is based on the level of the 
challenge overcome. Use the rules for creating encounters in 
the Pathfinder Playtest Bestiary to determine these values. For events that award XP but aren't opposed, such as 
mapping a dungeon, overcoming a difficult environmental 
obstacle, or establishing an organization, you'll need to 
decide the XP award. Determine whether the achievement 
was a minor, moderate, or major accomplishment and, 
using the table below, award them an appropriate amount 
of XP. Major accomplishments are usually the culmination 
of the characters' efforts across many sessions. Accomplishment
XP Award
Minor10 Moderate
30 Major80 As mentioned earlier, it's up to you how much XP to 
give out. As a general guideline, in a given game session 
you'll typically give up to five or six minor awards, two or 
three moderate awards, and only one major award, if any.
Any XP award gained goes to all members of the group. 
For instance, if the party wins a battle worth 100 XP, they 
each get 100 XP, even if the party's rogue was off in a 
vault stealing a treasure during the battle. If she collected 
a splendid gemstone, which you decided was worth 30 XP, all the party members get that XP, too.
PARTY SIZES
The rules for advancement assume a group of 
four characters. The rules for encounters (see the Pathfinder REWARDS STORY-BASED LEVELING
If you don't want to deal with managing and handing out XP, or 
if you want to have progression based solely on events in the 
story, you can ignore the XP process entirely and instead dictate 
when the group levels up. Generally, the characters should go 
up in level every three to four game sessions, just after the most 
appropriate big event that happens during that time, such as 
defeating a significant villain or achieving a major goal. If there's 
a spot in the story where you skip past a long span of time, you 
might decide to level up the characters faster or multiple times 
to account for what they were doing "off screen."
Playtest Bestiary) describe how to adjust for different sizes. 
You usually won't need to make many adjustments for a 
differently sized group outside of encounters. Be careful, 
though, if you provide multiple ways to get accomplishment-
based XP awards when you have a large group. This can 
mean that multiple people are working toward different 
accomplishments at once, leading to an XP influx. 
ADVANCEMENT SPEEDS
By varying the amount of Experience Points it takes to gain 
a level, you can change how quickly characters gain more 
power. For fast advancement, characters need 800 XP to 
level up. For slow advancement, they need 1,200 XP. Fast 
advancement works best when you know you won't be 
playing a very long campaign and want to accomplish as 
much as possible quickly; slow advancement works best 
for a gritty campaign where all progress is hard-won. You can even alter XP from adventure to adventure to 
get a different feel. During a street-level murder mystery or travel through a haunted wilderness, you might use slow advancement. Then, if the next adventure were a small, action-packed dungeon populated by genies, you might go for standard or fast advancement. 
GROUP PARITY
It's highly recommended that you keep all the player 
characters at the same XP total. This makes it much easier to 
know what challenges are suitable for your players. Having 
characters at different levels can mean weaker characters die 
more easily and their players feel less effective, which can 
make the game less fun for those players. If you don't keep the whole group at the same 
level, you'll need to select an average party level for determining how difficult encounters should be. Choose the level you think best represents the party's capability 
as a whole. This is usually the highest level if only one 
or two characters are behind, but might be an average if everyone is at a different level or there's a large gap 
between highest and lowest. Party members who are behind the party's average level 
should gain double the amount of XP the other characters 
do until they reach the party's average level. 
340 ENVIRONMENT
Environment doesn't just set the stage of adventure, it can 
present characters with its own challenges or constraints. 
Use this section to craft the terrain, climate, and hazards 
for your game. TERRAINWhat follows are some of the most common terrain types 
in the game and their rules. For more on terrain and 
variations due to the type of environment it's found in, see 
the Pathfinder Playtest Bestiary.
 BOGS
Also called mires, bogs are watery areas that accumulate peat, typically covered by shrubs and moss, they sometimes feature floating islands of vegetation covering 
deeper pools. Shallow bogs are difficult terrain for a Medium creature, and deep bogs are greater difficult terrain. A creature has to Swim if a bog is deep enough 
that the creature can't reach the bottom. Bogs are 
typically acidic, so particularly extreme or magical bogs can act as hazardous terrain. CRO
WDSCrowded thoroughfares and similar areas are difficult 
terrain, or greater difficult terrain if the area is truly 
packed. You might allow a character to get a crowd to 
part using Diplomacy, Intimidation, or Performance.
A crowd exposed to an obvious danger, like a fire or 
a rampaging monster, attempts to move away from it as 
quickly as possible, but it is often slowed by its own mass. 
A fleeing crowd typically moves at the Speed of an average 
member (typically 25 feet for a crowd mostly made up of 
humans), and it can potentially trample or leave behind 
slower-moving members of the crowd.
DOOR
SOpening an unlocked door requires at least 1 Interact 
action. Locked or stuck doors require you to Pick a Lock 
first, or break a door open using Break Open. ICE
Icy ground counts as both uneven ground and difficult 
terrain, as characters slip and slide due to poor traction. 
RUBBLE
Rubble counts as difficult terrain. Piles of rubble are 
uneven ground if they're dense enough that they need to 
be walked over rather than navigated through with care. SAND
Packed sand doesn't usually significantly impede 
characters' movement, but loose sand can be difficult 
terrain if it's shallow or uneven ground if it's deep.
SNOW
Depending on the depth of snow and its composition, 
most snowy ground is either difficult terrain or greater 
difficult terrain. Denser snow might allow characters 
to attempt to walk along the surface without breaking 
through, but some patches might be loose enough that 
they're uneven ground. 
STAIRS
Stairs are typically difficult terrain moving up, though 
shoddy stairs might also be uneven ground. Some temples 
and giant-built structures have enormous stairs that are 
greater difficult terrain or even require Climbing each step. 
TREES
Most trees don't provide cover unless a character Takes 
Cover. Only particularly massive trees that take up an 
entire 5-foot square on the map (or more) are big enough 
to provide cover automatically. 
UNDERGROWTH
Light undergrowth is difficult terrain and allows a 
character to Take Cover. Heavy undergrowth is greater 
difficult terrain that provides cover.
WATER
PCs who are underwater need a way to breathe (typically 
a water breathing spell) and must usually Swim in order 
to move, though a PC who sinks to the bottom can walk 
awkwardly, as if through greater difficult terrain. Use the 
aquatic combat rules and drowning and suffocation rules 
(see page 315).
CLIMATE
Weather is more than just set dressing to establish mood; it 
has mechanical effects you can combine with encounters for 
a memorable experience. Weather can impose circumstance 
penalties on certain checks, from –1 to –4 based on severity.
FOG
Fog imposes a circumstance penalty to visual Perception 
checks, depending on the thickness; causes creatures viewed 
through significant amounts of fog to be concealed; and 
cuts off all visibility at half a mile or less—potentially much 
less. Conditions limiting visibility to about a mile are called 
mist, and those that do so to about 3 miles are called haze. PRECIPITATION
Precipitation ranges from rain to colder forms like 
snow, sleet, and hail. Most impose penalties on visual 
Perception checks (hail is sparser but loud, instead penalizing auditory Perception checks). Wet precipitation 
douses flames, and frozen precipitation can create areas of snow or ice on the ground. Precipitation causes discomfort and fatigue. Anything 
heavier than drizzle or light snowfall reduces the time after 
341which characters become fatigued by exertion to 4 hours 
for normal exploration tactics or simple overland travel, 
or 5 minutes for a fatiguing tactic. Heavy precipitation can 
be dangerous in cold environments without protection. 
Soaked characters treat the temperature as one step colder 
(mild to severe, severe to extreme; see Temperature below). 
There's a negligible chance that a character is struck by 
lightning during a storm. If necessary, use damage from 
lightning bolt, heightened for a severe thunderstorm. TEMPERATURE
Usually temperature isn't important enough to worry 
about beyond describing clothing. Temperatures below 
freezing (32° F) are mild cold, and temperatures above 
around 95° F (ranging from 80° in high humidity to 120° in 
low humidity) are mild heat. They don't damage characters 
dressing appropriately, but they reduce the time after which 
characters become fatigued by exertion to 4 hours for 
most simple exploration tactics or simple overland travel, 
or 5 minutes for a fatiguing tactic..Temperatures 12° F and lower are severe cold, which 
deals 1d4 to 1d8 cold damage per hour unless one wears 
gear designed for low temperatures. Temperatures above 
around 105° F (from 90° to 130° based on humidity) are 
severe heat, dealing similar fire damage, regardless of gear.
Temperatures much above 115° F (from 100° to 140° 
based on humidity), extreme heat, are dangerous without 
magic. Temperatures –20° F or colder, extreme cold, occur 
in cold regions, and an arctic region at its coldest might be 
over 100° colder! Gear can reduce the severity but can't 
ignore such cold entirely. Extreme cold or heat deals 1d12 
damage every 10 minutes. At –80 ° F or less or 140° F or 
more, the damage occurs every minute. WIND
Wind imposes a circumstance penalty to auditory Perception 
checks depending on strength. It also influences physical 
ranged attacks like arrows, imposing a penalty on attack 
rolls involving such weapons and potentially making attacks 
with them impossible in powerful windstorms. Wind snuffs 
out handheld flames; lanterns protect their flame from the 
wind, but particularly powerful winds extinguish them. Wind counts as difficult or greater difficult terrain when 
Flying. Wind of sufficient strength requires a Maneuver 
in Flight action to move, blowing fliers away on a critical 
failure or if they don't succeed at least one such check each 
round. Even on the ground, particularly strong winds might 
require an Athletics check to move, knocking creatures back 
and prone on a critical failure. Small creatures typically take 
a –1 penalty on such checks, and Tiny creatures –2.
HAZARDSDungeons are rife with ancient traps meant to protect the 
treasures within. These range from simple mechanical 
devices that shoot darts or drop heavy blocks to magic 
runes that explode into bursts of flame. In addition to 
traps, adventurers occasionally stumble into other types 
of hazards, including naturally occurring environmental 
hazards, mysterious hauntings, and more. 
DETECTING A HAZARD
When characters approach a hazard, they have a chance 
of finding the trigger area or mechanism before triggering 
the hazard. Some hazards are impossible to detect unless 
a character has a minimum proficiency rank in Perception, as indicated in the hazard's Stealth entry (see Hazard 
Format on page 342), and such hazards can't be discovered 
unless a character is actively searching. When a character 
actively searches for hazards, roll a secret Perception 
check against the hazard's Stealth DC. Actively looking 
for hazards during combat or another type of encounter 
requires a Seek action. Magic hazards with no Stealth proficiency requirement 
or a Stealth proficiency requirement of trained can be 
detected with detect magic. Those that require expert or 
better proficiency are always masked to protect them from 
detection with detect magic. Determining the properties 
of such a magic hazard thoroughly enough to disable it 
requires a successful skill check to detect the hazard or 
the use of more powerful magic—detect magic alone is 
insufficient and reveals only the presence of the hazard. 
TRIGGERING A HAZARD
When the PCs come across a hazard in exploration mode 
while searching their surroundings, determine whether 
they detect it when they first enter the general area in 
which it appears. If they succeed, they become aware of 
the hazard, and you might want to map out or describe the 
area as they look closer. If they fail to detect the hazard, 
the circumstance that triggers the hazard occurs so long 
as it's a standard part of traveling, such as stepping on a 
floor plate trigger or moving through a magical sensor. 
Hazards that would trigger only when someone directly 
manipulates the environment—by opening a door 
or pulling a chain, for example—should trigger their 
reactions only if a PC explicitly takes that action. Hazards that appear in encounters require you to 
pay attention to the specific locations where they can 
be triggered. If the PCs get to the end of the encounter 
without triggering a hazard that's present, they should 
get full XP for the hazard. However, if they haven't fully 
explored the area before or during the fight, they might 
still trigger the hazard if they sweep the area afterward 
(this does not result in additional XP awards). 
When the PCs trigger a complex hazard, the hazard 
first performs its initial reaction. Then have the PCs 
roll initiative, adding the hazard's Stealth modifier to its 
initiative roll if it has a routine—a set of preprogrammed 
actions it performs on its turn. 
DISABLING A HAZARD
The most versatile method of deactivating traps is the 
342 Disable a Device use of the Thievery skill, though most 
mechanical traps can be smashed (see Destroying a 
Hazard below) and magical traps can usually be dispelled 
(see Dispelling a Hazard below). Environmental hazards 
are often overcome with Nature or Survival, and haunt 
hazards are often deactivated with Occultism or Religion. 
The specific skill and DC required to disable a hazard 
is listed in the Disable entry of the hazard's stat block 
(see Hazard Format below). As with detecting a hazard, 
disabling a hazard might require a certain proficiency 
rank in the listed skill, which appears after that skill and 
DC in the Disable entry.
A character must first detect a hazard in order to 
attempt to deactivate it, since particular details about the 
hazard dictate the proper countermeasures. A character 
can attempt to deactivate a hazard whether or not it's 
already been triggered, though some hazards no longer 
pose a danger once they've been triggered. A success with the listed skill against the DC in the stat 
block disables the hazard without triggering it. Any other 
means of deactivating the hazard, such as counteracting a 
magic trap, are included in the hazard's stat block, as are 
any additional steps required to properly deactivate it. A 
critical failure on any roll to disable a hazard triggers it, 
including a critical failure on a spell roll to disable it. Some hazards require multiple checks to deactivate, either 
for a particularly complicated component or for different 
portions of a larger hazard. For such hazards, a critical 
success counts as two successes on a single component. 
DESTROYING A HAZARD
Rather than trying to carefully disable a hazard, a character 
might just smash it. Damaging a mechanical trap or another 
physical hazard works like damaging objects. An attack 
that deals at least as much damage as the hazard's Hardness 
dents it, and an attack that deals twice as much damage as 
the Hardness dents it twice (usually breaking it). In most 
cases, breaking or destroying the hazard also triggers it. 
Hazards list their AC, TAC, Hardness, Fortitude saves, 
and Reflex saves in their stat blocks. Hazards are immune 
to anything an object is immune to unless noted otherwise, 
and can't be targeted by anything that doesn't target objects.
DISPELLING A MAGIC HAZARD
Some magic hazards can be dispelled using dispel magic. Such a hazard lists its spell DC in the Disable entry of 
the stat block, followed by its spell level in parentheses. 
Dispelling a hazard otherwise works like using a skill 
check to disable the hazard. HAZARD FORMAT
Hazards are presented in a stat block format like a monster.
NAME AND LEVEL
The first line of a hazard gives the hazard's name and the 
level of party it presents a challenge for. If the hazard has 
a component toxin, curse, or other non-spell feature, that 
feature's level is the hazard's level.
TRAITS
A hazard has a trait to indicate whether it's magical or 
mechanical. Many hazards fall into a specific category 
that's important for how other abilities and skills interact 
with them, the most notable categories being trap (for 
hazards specifically constructed to harm intruders), 
environmental (for natural hazards), and haunt (for 
spectral phenomena). Hazards that have initiative and a 
routine have the complex trait to indicate this. 
STEALTH DC
This is the hazard's Stealth DC, which it uses to avoid 
being detected. A complex hazard instead lists its Stealth 
modifier for rolling initiative, followed by a DC if there's 
a chance someone might detect it. If the hazard requires 
a minimum proficiency rank in Perception to find it, that 
rank appears in parentheses. Hazards that can be detected 
using detect magic (see Detecting a Hazard on page 341) 
indicate that quality in this entry.
DESCRIPTION
This entry details the parts of the hazard and how they 
work together.
DISABLE
The skills and DCs required to deactivate or bypass 
the hazard are described here. A hazard that requires 
the disabler to have a minimum proficiency rank in the 
listed skill lists that information in parentheses. For 
magic traps that can be dispelled, this entry includes the 
spell DC, as well as the minimum level of 
dispel magic
 required (listed in parentheses). 
AC
Attacks against a mechanical trap or other physical 
hazard target this AC. When designing a mechanical trap, 
it's usually appropriate to set the TAC equal to or less 
than its AC – 4. An attack roll that critically fails triggers 
the hazard, as does breaking or destroying the hazard. SAVE
SA mechanical trap or other physical hazard's modifiers 
to Fortitude and Reflex saves are listed here. On rare 
occasions (usually for haunts), hazards have Will saves.
HARDNESS
A physical hazard's Hardness indicates how difficult it 
is to break via damage. If a hazard can take more than 1 Dent without becoming broken, this entry lists in parentheses the total number of Dents it can take before becoming broken. So "Hardness 11 (2 Dents)" means the hazard could take damage equal to or exceeding its Hardness twice (either taking damage twice or taking 343double its Hardness in damage at once) and still function. The third time it took that much damage, it would be broken. If the hazard has multiple components, the part of the trap with the listed Hardness is set in parentheses. 
IMMUNITIES AND RESISTANCES
Physical hazards are immune to critical hits and precision damage, as well as the immunities common to objects (see page 175). Other immunities a specific hazard has are listed in this entry, followed by any resistances or 
weaknesses it has. REACTION
Most hazards have a reaction that occurs when they're 
triggered. For most hazards, the reaction is the entirety 
of the hazard's effect. For complex hazards, the reaction 
also causes the hazard to roll initiative, either starting a 
combat encounter or joining one already in progress. 
ROUTINE
This entry describes what a complex hazard does on its 
initiative. Unlike creatures, a hazard usually has a rote 
program it follows. The hazard's number of actions per 
turn is noted in parentheses; if partially disabling the 
hazard reduces the number of actions it can take each 
round, this is noted in the Routine entry.
SPEED
If a complex hazard can move during its routine, it has 
a Speed entry. A hazard without a routine describes any 
movement it can make in the Reaction entry instead. ATTACK
SIf a hazard makes attacks, it has the appropriate melee or 
ranged attack entries. RESET
If a hazard can activate multiple times, the reset entry explains 
how the hazard is reset and how long it takes to do so. SIMPLE HAZARDSThe following are a couple examples of simple hazards. 
Others can be found in the Pathfinder Playtest Bestiary. 
HIDDEN PIT HAZARD 
0STealth DC 16 Description A trapdoor covers a 10-foot-square pit 
that is 20 feet deep.
Disable Thievery DC 12 to remove the trapdoor, making the trap 
no longer hidden (Perception DC 0 to notice)
AC 10, TAC 
7; Fort
 +1, Ref
 +1 Hardness
 4 (trapdoor); 
Immunities critical hits, object immunities, 
precision damage
 Pitfall Trigger
 A creature walks onto the trapdoor.
Effect The triggering creature falls in and takes falling damage 
Mechanical 
Trap
(typically 10 bludgeoning damage). That creature can use 
the Grab Edge reaction to avoid falling (see page 144). 
Reset 
The trap still causes falling damage if anyone falls in, but 
the trapdoor must be reset manually for the trap to become 
hidden again. SPEAR LAUNCHER
 HAZARD 
2STealth DC 19 (trained)Description A wall socket loaded with a spear 
connects to a fioor tile in one 5-foot square.
Disable Thievery DC 15 (trained) on the fioor tile or wall socket
AC 16, TAC 
11; Fort
 +7, 
Ref
 +4 Hardness
 8; Immunities critical hits, object immunities, precision
 damage Spear (attack) 
Trigger
 Pressure is applied to the fioor tile.
Effect The trap makes an attack against the creature or object 
on that tile.
Ranged spear +11, Damage 2d6+6 piercing
COMPLEX HAZARDSComplex hazards are involved enough to be their own 
encounters, or to take the place of monsters in multiple-monster encounters. They roll initiative and have actions 
of their own, though these are usually automated through 
specific routines. Here's an example of a complex hazard.
POISONED DART GALLERY HAZARD 
8STealth +16 (expert) or DC 29 (master) to notice the 
control panel
Description Countless holes to launch poison 
darts line a long hallway with a hidden control panel on the 
far end. Disable Thievery DC 21 (expert) on the control panel deactivates it.
AC 25, TAC 
22; Fort
 +11, Ref
 +15 Hardness
 17 (2 Dents) to destroy the control panel and disable the 
trap; Immunities critical hits, object immunities, precision damage
 Dart Volley
 (attack)
Trigger
 A creature enters the hallway. 
Effect The trap makes an attack against the triggering 
creature and then rolls initiative.
Routine
 (1 action) The trap launches one dart against every 
creature in the gallery as 1 action. Because it launches darts 
continuously, the trap also has a free action to launch a dart at 
each creature during that creature's turns.
Ranged poisoned dart +18, Damage 3d4 piercing plus fiesset 
poison; no multiple attack penalty
 Continuous BarrageTrigger
 A creature within the active gallery finishes an action.
Effect The trap makes a poisoned dart Strike against the triggering creature.
Flesset Poison 
(poison) Fortitude DC 20; 
Maximum Duration
 6 rounds; 
Stage 1 1d6 poison damage and sluggish 1 (1 round); 
Stage 2 2d6 poison damage and sluggish 2 (1 round); 
Stage 3 3d6 poison damage and sluggish 3 (1 round)
Reset
 The trap deactivates and resets after 1 minute.
Mechanical 
Trap
Mechanical 
Trap
Complex
MechanicalTrap
344 As characters adventure, defeat foes, defend the innocent, and perform 
favors for grand personalities from kingdoms, temples, and guilds, they'll 
acquire treasure as either loot or rewards.
indicating the item's level. The latter measures what 
level of adventurer the item is best suited for. For those 
who can Craft magic items (having the appropriate skill 
proficiencies, necessary feats, and the item's formula), this 
is the level requirement to Craft the item. 
For instance, a 3rd-level character might find items of 
level 4 and higher through adventuring, and if she's in a 
large enough settlement, she might also find such items to 
purchase if the GM determines they're for sale. She can 
use such items normally, but she can't Craft them, even if 
she has the formula. 
If there are multiple versions of the same item, the level 
of the item is followed by a plus symbol ("+"). The number 
indicates the lowest-level item described, and information 
on the different versions is provided in the description. 
ITEM TRAITS
The box below the name and level lists all of the item's 
traits (see the magical trait for a description of how the 
arcane, divine, occult, and primal traits work with items).The following traits indicate rules that apply to items. Alchemical Alchemical items are powered by the reactions 
of alchemical reagents sometimes sparked by the user's 
Resonance Points. Alchemical items aren't magical, and they 
don't have a magical aura. Characters can craft these items only 
if they have the Alchemical Crafting feat (see page 162–163).
Bomb Alchemical bombs must be thrown instead of activated. 
Most of them explode, dealing damage to their target and 
splash damage to nearby creatures. Their rules are provided 
on page 359.Consumable An item with this trait can be used only once. Unless 
stated otherwise, it is destroyed after activation, though in 
some cases, some part of it might be recoverable for other 
purposes. For instance, while a potion is a consumable item, 
the vial the potion comes in is not destroyed after the potion 
is activated.
When a character creates consumable items, she can 
make them in batches of four, as described in the Craft 
activity (see page 148).Elixir The alchemical items called elixirs need to be drunk to be 
activated. Their rules can be found on page 359.
Invested
 An item that a character needs to prepare by investing 
it with a Resonance Point has the invested trait. Most invested 
items are worn, like armor, clothing, or jewelry. None of the 
magical effects of the item apply if the character hasn't invested 
Treasure often takes the form of coins and other types of 
currency. Raw materials and gems are two other assets 
that appear frequently. Characters often can use these 
directly by turning them into items with the Crafting skill 
rather than using coins to buy the necessary materials. Magic items come in many varieties, from magic 
swords that can harm wispy, incorporeal undead to 
bags of holding that can hold a king's ransom within a 
tiny extradimensional space. Alchemical items are not 
intrinsically magical and are consumed when used, but 
they have a variety of uses, from curing the sick to lighting 
foes on fire. This chapter provides details and rules for various 
treasures encountered in the game, as well as guidelines 
and tools for creating treasure hoards for your campaign. 
It includes the following sections:
Ł Distributing Treasure on page 347 shows you how to 
allocate treasure in appropriate amounts throughout 
your
 adventures.

Ł Treasure Tables, beginning on page 348, lists your options 
for treasures, arranged by level, category, and Price.

Ł Materials on page 354 details some of the special metals 
and woods found in the game world, which can give items 
different properties.

Ł Special Nonmagical Items on page 356 details speciflc 
items made of special materials. They aren't magical but are 
especially valuable and more powerful than ordinary items.

Ł Snares on page 357 details special traps typically made 
by
 rangers.
Ł Alchemical Items on page 359 details nonmagical 
substances with extraordinary effects that are often 
created by alchemists.

Ł Runes on page 370 details items that can be etched onto 
weapons and armor to improve them or give them special 
magical properties.

Ł Magic Items on page 376 details items ranging from magic 
weapons to minor trinkets.
READING ITEM STAT BLOCKS
Whether an item is alchemical, magical, or mundane, it's 
presented in the following format. If an item does not 
require one of these entries, that entry is omitted. 
NAME AND LEVEL
The top line provides the item's name and a number 
TREASURE345it, though the character still gains any normal benefits from the 
physical item (like a hat keeping rain ofi a character's head).
Magical Magical items are imbued with magical energies. Each 
one radiates a magic aura infused with its dominant school 
of magic (abjuration, conjuration, divination, enchantment, 
evocation, illusion, necromancy, or transmutation). A character 
can craft these items only if she has the Magical Crafting feat 
(see page 168).Some items are closely tied to a particular tradition of magic. In 
these cases, the item has the arcane, divine, occult, or primal 
trait instead of the magical trait. Any of these traits indicates 
that the item is magical.
Mutagen The alchemical elixirs called mutagens change the imbiber's mental and physical characteristics. Their rules 
appear on page 359.Oil An oil (see page 378) is a liquid magic item applied to the surface of an item or creature.
Potent
 When a character invests an item with this trait, it improves 
one of that character's ability scores, either increasing it to 18 
or increasing it by 2, whichever grants the higher ability score. 
This ability score increase grants all the benefits of the new 
ability score. Increasing Intelligence lets the owner become 
trained in an additional skill, increasing Charisma adds to her 
Resonance Points, increasing Constitution gives her more Hit 
Points, and so on. These benefits go away once the investiture 
runs out. A potent item grants this benefit only the first time it's 
invested within a 24-hour period, and a character can benefit 
from only one potent item at a time. If a character attempts to 
invest a potent item when she already has one invested, she 
doesn't gain the ability score increase from the second item 
(though she still gains any other benefits from the second item).
Potion 
A creature activates and consumes these magical liquids 
by drinking them. The most popular potions are 
healing potions. Potion rules appear on page 378.
Scroll
 A spell can be written on a piece of parchment called a 
scroll to be cast later. The special rules for scrolls appear on 
page 378.Snare 
Traps typically made by rangers, snares follow special rules 
that allow them to be constructed quickly and used on the 
battlefleld. Snare rules appear on page 357.
Splash When a character uses a thrown weapon with the splash 
trait (such as an alchemical bomb or holy water), she doesn't 
add her Strength modifier to the damage roll. A splash weapon 
can deal splash damage in addition to its normal damage. If 
an attack with a splash weapon fails, succeeds, or critically 
succeeds, all creatures within 5 feet of the target take the 
indicated amount of splash damage. On a failure (but not a 
critical failure), the target of the attack also takes the splash 
damage. Splash damage is not multiplied on a critical hit. Stafi A stafi includes a collection of spells in a particular theme. A spellcaster who has invested a stafi can expend their own 
spells or charges held in the stafi to cast the spells. The special rules for staves appear on page 379.
Trinket
 The consumable magic items called trinkets must be 
afixed to items before they can be activated. Most trinkets 
require the user to have a special feat or skill to make use of 
them. See pages 379–380 for the full rules on trinkets.
Wand
 A wand is a stick or similar object containing a spell that 
can be cast a certain number of times. The special rules for wands appear on page 380.
PRICE
This entry provides the Price of an item. If an item is 
available for purchase, a character can typically buy it for 
the listed Price, and the character uses this Price when she 
uses the Craft activity to make the item. If the character 
wishes to sell an item, she can sell it for half its Price (or 
full Price if the item was made on commission), assuming 
she's able to find a buyer.
An item with multiple versions lists the Price for each 
version lower in its description. 
METHOD OF USE
This section of an item's stat block indicates whether a 
character must be holding or wearing the item in order 
to use it, or whether she instead must have it etched or 
affixed onto another item. 
If a character must wield the item to use it, this entry in 
the item's stat block lists the word "held" along with the 
number of hands the character must use when wielding 
the item, such as "held, 1 hand." If the character is not 
using the correct number of hands, she'll have to either 
draw the item or change her grip with the Interact action, 
as described on page 307. 
Most items a character must wear to benefit from also 
need to be invested with Resonance Points before they 
confer their benefits (see Activation, Investiture, and Onset 
below). If an item's Method of Use entry says only "worn" 
and isn't followed by a given type of item, a character can 
wear any number of that item. For instance, a character 
can wear any number of rings, so the entry for a ring 
would list only "worn." However, if a character can wear 
only one of a given type of item, that item's form is listed 
following the word "worn." For example, if the Method 
of Use entry for an item is "worn, cloak," then a character 
could wear only one cloak. It's assumed items are meant to 
be worn by humanoids; any item that can or must be worn 
by a different type of creature says so in its description. ITEM RARITYLike many other aspects of the rules, items have rarities. 
Player characters might find uncommon magic items for sale, 
but infrequently and often by private sellers or in clandestine 
markets. Their formulas are often guarded and not readily 
available. Unless the GM decides otherwise, a character cannot 
purchase rare items, and their formulas are lost to time.
Rarities for uncommon and rare treasures are usually 
indicated by the level box, which is black for common, red for 
uncommon, orange for rare, and blue for unique.
346 Some items enhance other items. Runes can be etched 
into only armor, weapons, or 
runestones (see page
 406). 
Adding or transferring a rune takes downtime to 
accomplish. The Method of Use entry indicates the 
type or types of items a rune can be etched into, such as 
"etched, weapon."Trinkets function only if attached to other items. They 
have a Method of Use entry indicating the type or types 
of items to which a character can attach them, such as 
"affixed, armor."
BULK
Items have a Bulk value that represents how large and 
heavy that item is. The amount of Bulk a character 
can wear and carry is limited (see page 175). The Bulk 
values of magical weapons and armor are the same 
as the nonmagical versions unless noted otherwise. 
Runes don't have a Bulk entry because they aren't 
physical
 objects.
ACTIVATION, INVESTITURE, AND ONSET
If an item requires activation or investiture to use, these 
entries in the item's stat block indicate which activations 
a character needs to take. Full rules for activation and 
investiture appear on pages 376–377. Most activations 
and investiture cost 1 Resonance Point, but if the item's 
activation requires a different RP cost (or no RP cost), 
that information is provided here. If the activation is 
a reaction or free action, this entry is followed by a 
Trigger entry.
An Onset entry indicates the item's effect is delayed. The 
onset is the amount of time that elapses once a character 
activates an item before any effect occurs. 
DESCRIPTION
Each item has a description, a sentence or more 
presenting the specific rules for the item's abilities, 
details about activation, and any activated effects. The 
description appears after the entries outlined above, but 
before the information about crafting an item or etching 
a rune. 
If an item has multiple versions, this section also 
describes those versions along with their respective levels 
and the Prices, as well as other information specific to 
each version. The features common to all versions of the 
item appear in its description. 
CRAFT REQUIREMENTS
This entry appears only if the item requires specific raw 
materials, spells, or anything else extra needed to Craft it. 
These requirements are added to the Craft activity when a 
character makes this item. The default requirements to Craft items aren't included 
here. Every item requires a character to provide half the 
item's Price in raw materials (as explained in the Craft 
activity). In addition, creating magic items requires the 
Magical Crafting feat (see page 168) or a similar ability, 
and creating alchemical items requires the Alchemical 
Crafting feat (see page 162) or a similar ability. Scrolls 
can be created with the Scribe Scroll feat (see page 171).347 As the GM, it's your job to distribute treasure to the 
player characters. This treasure will appear throughout 
the adventure, and the PCs can obtain it by raiding 
treasure hoards, defeating foes who carry valuable items 
or currency on them, by doing quests and getting paid for 
them, and in any other way your imagination devises. This section provides guidelines suitable for a typical 
Pathfinder campaign, but you always have the freedom to 
assign extra treasure for a high-powered game, less treasure 
for a gritty survival horror game, or any amount in between. PARTY TREASURE GAIN
The Party Treasure by Level table shows how much 
treasure you should give out over the course of a level for a 
group of four PCs. The listed number of permanent items, 
consumables, and currency represents a combination of 
treasure hoards, the gear monsters and enemies have, and 
rewards from other NPCs for the PCs' accomplishments. For instance, between the time your PCs reach 3rd level 
and the time they reach 4th level, you should give them 
the treasure listed in the table for 3rd level: two 4th-level 
permanent items, three 3rd-level permanent items, four 
4th-level consumables, six 3rd-level consumables, two 
2nd-level consumables, and 120 gp worth of currency. 
While there is no way to reach level 21, the treasure 
listed in the level 20 row represents a roughly full level's 
worth of adventures at level 20. When assigning level 1 
permanent items, your best options are weapons, armor, 
and gear from Chapter 6 worth between 10 and 20 gp. 
CURRENCY
A party will find money and other treasure that isn't useful 
on its own but can be sold or spent toward whatever ends 
the characters see fit. The gp values in the Party Currency 
column don't refer only to coin. Art objects, crafting 
materials (including special materials), jewelry, and even 
items of much lower level than the party's level can all be 
more interesting than a pile of gold. If you choose to use 
lower-level items as part of this value, count them as half 
their Price toward the gp amount, assuming the party will 
sell the items. 
DIFFERENT ITEM LEVELS
The levels listed for items on the Party Treasure by Level 
table aren't set in stone. You can provide items of slightly 
higher or lower level as long as you take into account the value of the items you hand out. For instance, suppose you were considering giving a 
party of 11th-level PCs a fortification rune (with a Price 
of 2,000 gp) as one of their 12th-level items, but you realize 
they've had trouble finding any armor at all in their recent 
adventures, so you instead decide to give them another 
suit of 11th-level +3 magic armor (1,400 gp). Since the 
armor has a lower Price than the rune, you might consider 
also adding in a 9th-level flaming runestone (703 gp) to 
make up the difference. Similarly, if you wanted to place a 13th-level permanent 
item in a treasure hoard, you could remove two 11th-level permanent items to make the exchange roughly 
equivalent. When you make an exchange upward like 
this, be cautious: you might not only introduce an item 
with effects that are disruptive at the party's current level 
TABLE 11–1: PARTY TREASURE BY LEVEL
Level
Permanent Items
ConsumablesParty Currency
Additional Character
11 2nd, 2 1st2 3rd, 4 2nd, 10 1st
32 gp8 gp21 3rd, 2 2nd
4 3rd, 8 2nd, 2 1st
64 gp16 gp32 4th, 3 3rd
4 4th, 6 3rd, 2 2nd
120 gp30 gp42 5th, 2 4th4 5th, 4 4th, 2 3rd
200 gp50 gp52 6th, 2 5th, 1 4th2 6th, 6 5th, 2 4th320 gp80 gp62 7th, 2 6th2 7th, 4 6th, 2 5th500 gp125 gp72 8th, 2 7th4 8th, 2 7th, 2 6th720 gp180 gp82 9th, 2 8th2 9th, 4 8th, 2 7th1,000 gp250 gp92 10th, 2 9th2 10th, 4 9th, 2 8th1,400 gp
350 gp102 11th, 2 10th2 11th, 4 10th, 2 9th2,000 gp500 gp112 12th, 2 11th2 12th, 4 11th, 2 10th2,800 gp700 gp122 13th, 2 12th2 13th, 6 12th4,000 gp1,000 gp132 14th, 2 13th2 14th, 4 13th, 2 12th6,000 gp1,500 gp142 15th, 2 14th2 15th, 4 14th, 2 13th9,000 gp2,250 gp152 16th, 2 15th2 16th, 4 15th, 2 14th13,000 gp3,250 gp162 17th, 2 16th2 17th, 4 16th20,000 gp5,000 gp172 18th, 2 17th2 18th, 4 17th30,000 gp7,500 gp
182 19th, 2 18th2 19th, 4 18th48,000 gp12,000 gp192 20th, 2 19th2 20th, 4 19th80,000 gp20,000 gp202 20th4 20th140,000 gp35,000 gpDISTRIBUTING TREASURE348of play, but you also might give an amazing item to one 
PC while others don't gain any new items at all.
If you're playing in a long-term campaign, you can also 
spread out the treasures over time. There might be a major 
milestone that gives extra treasure at one level followed 
by a tougher dungeon with fewer new items at the next 
level. Sometimes you might want to check back in to see 
whether each PC's treasure is comparable with the amount 
they'd get if they created a new character at that level, 
as described under Treasure for New Characters below. 
If there's a significant discrepancy, adjust the upcoming 
adventure's treasure rewards accordingly.
DIFFERENT PARTY SIZES
If a party has more than four characters, add the following 
for each additional character:
Ł One permanent item of the party's level or 1 level higher

Ł Two consumables, usually one of the party's level and one of 1 
level higher

Ł Currency with a value listed in the Party Treasure by Level 
table in the Additional Character column
If the party has fewer than four characters, you can 
subtract the same amount for each missing character, 
but since the game is inherently more challenging with a 
smaller group that can't cover all roles as efficiently, you 
might consider subtracting less treasure. 
OTHER TYPES OF TREASURE
Not all treasure has to be items or currency. Knowledge 
can expand a character's abilities. Formulas make good 
treasure for item-crafting characters. A spellcaster might 
get access to new spells from an enemy's spellbook or 
an ancient scholar they meet, while a monk might learn 
techniques from a master on a remote mountaintop. 
Treasure and Rarity
Giving out uncommon and rare items and formulas can be a great way to get players more interested in treasure. Typically, it's best to introduce uncommon items fairly 
regularly and rare items only occasionally. It's especially 
compelling when the adventurers get the item by defeating or outsmarting an enemy who carries the item because it 
fits that enemy's backstory or theme.
Uncommon and rare formulas make great treasure for an 
item-crafting character. If an uncommon or rare formula is 
broadly disseminated, it eventually becomes more common. 
This can take days, months, or years, but the item might 
start showing up in shops all around the world. TREASURE FOR NEW CHARACTERS 
Whether you're starting a campaign at higher level, a new player joins an existing group, or a current player's 
character dies and she needs a new one, your campaign might have a PC who didn't start at 1st level. In these 
cases, refer to the Character Wealth table, which lets you 
know how many common permanent items of various levels the PC should have, plus additional currency. 
The player can spend her currency as she wishes on consumables or lower-level permanent items, keeping the 
rest as coinage. These values are for a PC just starting out the given 
level. If the PC is joining a party that has made progress 
toward the next level, you might consider giving the new 
character an item of their current level as well. If your 
party still has the treasure of dead or retired PCs, you 
might need to either decrease the values on the table or 
reduce some of the treasure rewards for a little while. You and the player should work together to decide 
which items the new character has. Allow the player to 
make suggestions, and if they know what items they want 
their character to have, respect their choices unless you 
have reason to believe they are trying to abuse the system. 
At your discretion, you can also assign them uncommon or 
rare items that fit their backstory and character, in keeping 
with how many items of those rarities have already been 
introduced in your game. A PC can voluntarily take an item that has a lower level 
than any or all of the listed items, but doing so doesn't 
give any more currency. In the case of items made from 
special materials, items should be selected based on the 
table in which they appear, not their item level.
TREASURE TABLES
The following tables list the items and runes appearing in 
this chapter. Each table includes all the options of a given 
item level, organized by category and name. A superscript 
"U" indicates the item is uncommon, and a superscript 
"R" indicates it's rare.
TABLE 11–2: CHARACTER WEALTH
Level
Permanent Items
Currency
1—15 gp21 1st15 gp31 2nd, 2 1st20 gp41 3rd, 2 2nd, 1 1st
30 gp51 4th, 2 3rd, 1 2nd, 2 1st
50 gp61 5th, 2 4th, 1 3rd, 2 2nd
80 gp71 6th, 2 5th, 1 4th, 2 3rd
125 gp81 7th, 2 6th, 1 5th, 2 4th180 gp91 8th, 2 7th, 1 6th, 2 5th250 gp101 9th, 2 8th, 1 7th, 2 6th350 gp111 10th, 2 9th, 1 8th, 2 7th500 gp121 11th, 2 10th, 1 9th, 2 8th700 gp131 12th, 2 11th, 1 10th, 2 9th1,000 gp141 13th, 2 12th, 1 11th, 2 10th1,500 gp151 14th, 2 13th, 1 12th, 2 11th2,250 gp161 15th, 2 14th, 1 13th, 2 12th3,250 gp171 16th, 2 15th, 1 14th, 2 13th5,000 gp181 17th, 2 16th, 1 15th, 2 14th7,500 gp
191 18th, 2 17th, 1 16th, 2 15th12,000 gp201 19th, 2 18th, 1 17th, 2 16th20,000 gp3491st-Level Treasure
Category
PricePageLight ammunitionAmmunition2 gp396 Acid ffiask
Bomb3 gp360 Alchemist's fire
Bomb3 gp360 Bottled lightningBomb3 gp362 Liquid iceBomb3 gp366 Tanglefoot bag
Bomb3 gp369THunderstoneBomb3 gp369 Bird feather token
Consumable2 gp389 Holy water
Consumable2 gp394 Ladder feather token
Consumable2 gp390 Unholy water
Consumable2 gp412 AntidoteElixir2 gp360 AntiplagueElixir2 gp361 Cheetah's elixir
Elixir2 gp363 Darkvision elixirElixir2 gp364 Eagle-eye elixir
Elixir2 gp364 Leaper's elixir
Elixir2 gp366 Minor elixir of lifeElixir3 gp364 RunestoneHeld3 gp406 Nectar of purificationOil2 gp399 ArsenicPoison
2 gp361 Giant centipede venom
Poison
3 gp365 Minor healing potionPotion
3 gp393 Scroll of 1st-level spell
Scroll
3 gp379 Silversheen
Tool
2 gp368 SmokestickTool
2 gp369 Sunrod
Tool
2 gp369 Tindertwig (10)Tool
2 gp369 Jade catTrinket
2 gp396 Owlbear clawTrinket
3 gp400 Potency crystal
Trinket
2 gp402 Wolf fang
Trinket
4 gp413 Dull gray aeon stone
UWorn
5 gp3802nd-Level Treasure
Category
PricePageSleep arrow
Ammunition5 gp407 Holly bush feather tokenConsumable5 gp390 Comprehension elixir
Elixir4 gp364 Inflltrator's elixir
Elixir4 gp365 Salamander elixirElixir4 gp367STone flst elixirElixir5 gp369 Winter wolf elixir
Elixir4 gp369 Everburning torch
Held25 gp389 Wayfinder
UHeld27 gp413 Oil of potencyOil5 gp399 Oil of weightlessness
Oil4 gp399 BelladonnaPoison
4 gp361 Sleep poisonUPoison
5 gp368 Black adder venom
Poison
5 gp361 Expert light wooden 
sturdy
 shieldShield35 gp411 Bloodseeker beakTrinket
5 gp383 Returning clasp
Trinket
4 gp403 Wand of 1st-level spell
Wand
27 gp380 Bracers of armor 1st
Worn
35 gp383 Brooch of shielding
UWorn
33 gp3842nd-Level Treasure (cont.)
Category
PricePageExpert handwraps of mighty 
fistsWorn
35 gp393 Hand of the mageWorn
30 gp393 Hat of disguiseWorn
30 gp3933rd-Level Treasure
Category
PricePageBeacon shotAmmunition7 gp382 Spellstrike ammunition 1stAmmunition7 gp408 Vine arrow
Ammunition6 gp412+1 magic light or medium 
armorArmor 60 gp397 Chest feather tokenConsumable7 gp390 Bomber's eye elixir
Elixir8 gp362 Bravo's brew
Elixir7 gp362 Cat's eye elixir
Elixir3 gp363 Greater darkvision elixir
Elixir6 gp364 Mistform elixirElixir8 gp366 Cold iron warhammer
Nonmagical60 gp356 Silver dagger
Nonmagical50 gp356 Oil of mendingOil6 gp399 Cytillesh oil
Poison
8 gp363 Graveroot
Poison
8 gp365 Barkskin potionPotion
8 gp382 Invisibility potionUPotion
8 gp396 Lesser healing potion
Potion
8 gp393 Potion of water breathing
Potion
6 gp403+1 light or medium armor potencyRune25 gp371 Scroll of 2nd-level spell
Scroll
8 gp378 Lesser mentalist's stafl
Stafi60 gp398 Lesser stafl of fire
Stafi60 gp409 Minor stafl of healingStafi60 gp409 Feather step stone
Trinket
6 gp389 Monkey pin
Trinket
6 gp398 Savior spikeTrinket
6 gp406 Bracers of missile defiection
Worn
60 gp383 Doubling ringsWorn
50 gp3874th-Level Treasure
Category
PricePageClimbing boltAmmunition9 gp385 Viper arrow
UAmmunition12 gp412+1 magic heavy armorArmor 100 gp397 Fan feather token
Consumable12 gp390 Lesser elixir of life
Elixir12 gp364 Sea touch elixirElixir10 gp368 Bag of holding type IHeld80 gp382 Ghost touchRune100 gp373+1 heavy armor potencyRune50 gp371 Returning
Rune100 gp374
SlickRune80 gp375+1 weapon potency
Rune65 gp371 Expert light steel sturdy shield
Shield90 gp411 Fear gem
Trinket
11 gp389 Wand of 2nd-level spell
Wand
72 gp380+1 magic weapon
Weapon
100 gp397 Bracers of armor 2nd
Worn
95 gp383+1 handwraps of mighty fists
Worn
100 gp3933505th-Level Treasure
Category
PricePageSpellstrike ammunition 2ndAmmunition16 gp408 Ghoul hideUArmor 140 gp392 Dust of appearance
Consumable18 gp388 Greater antidote
Elixir15 gp361 Greater antiplague
Elixir15 gp361 Lesser bestial mutagen
UElixir20 gp361 Lesser bullheaded mutagen
UElixir20 gp362 Lesser cognitive mutagen
UElixir20 gp363 Lesser juggernaut mutagen
UElixir20 gp366 Lesser quicksilver mutagen
UElixir20 gp367 Lesser silvertongue mutagen
UElixir20 gp368 Divine prayer beads
UHeld160 gp387 Skeleton key
Held125 gp407THurible of revelation
Held140 gp411 Salve of antiparalysis
Oil15 gp406 Salve of slipperiness
Oil15 gp406 Hunting spider venom
Poison
20 gp365 Lesser potion of resistance
Potion
18 gp402 Moderate healing potion
Potion
20 gp394 Potion of leaping
Potion
15 gp402 DisruptingRune150 gp373 Glamered
Rune140 gp373 Shadow
Rune140 gp374
ShiftingRune140 gp374
Scroll of 3rd-level spell
Scroll
20 gp379 Expert heavy wooden sturdy 
shieldShield140 gp411 Lesser stafl of abjuration
Stafi160 gp408 Lesser stafl of conjuration
Stafi160 gp408 Lesser stafl of divination
Stafi160 gp408 Lesser stafl of enchantment
Stafi160 gp409 Lesser stafl of evocation
Stafi160 gp409 Lesser stafl of illusion
Stafi160 gp410 Lesser stafl of necromancy
Stafi160 gp410 Lesser stafl of transmutation
Stafi160 gp410 Verdant stafl
Stafi160 gp412 Bronze bull pendant
Trinket
18 gp384 Onyx pantherTrinket
19 gp400 Dagger of venom
Weapon
160 gp386 Fighter's fork
Weapon
150 gp390 Clandestine cloakUWorn
150 gp385 Coyote cloak
Worn
125 gp386 Crafter's eyepiece
Worn
125 gp386 Hat of the magiWorn
150 gp393 Necklace of fireballs type I
Worn
44 gp
398 Persona mask
Worn
155 gp400 Phylactery of the occultWorn
150 gp400 Ring of the ram
Worn
160 gp404 Tracker's goggles
Worn
135 gp4116th-Level Treasure
Category
PricePageTree feather token
Consumable26 gp390 True darkvision elixir
Elixir24 gp
364 Chime of openingUHeld235 gp384 Primeval mistletoe
Held230 gp403 Traveler's any-tool
Held200 gp4126th-Level Treasure (cont.)
Category
PricePageGreater oil of
 weightlessness
Oil25 gp399 Giant scorpion venom
Poison
30 gp365 Potion of quickness
Potion
30 gp402 Potion of swimming
Potion
25 gp402 Wounding
Rune250 gp375 Lion's shield
Shield245 gp
396 Spellguard shield
Shield240 gp
408 Grim trophy
Trinket
30 gp392 Mesmerizing opalTrinket
28 gp398 Mummified batTrinket
25 gp398 Wand of 3rd-level spell
Wand
180 gp380 Bloodletting kukriUWeapon
250 gp383 Boots of elvenkind
Worn
235 gp383 Choker of elocutionWorn
200 gp385 Dancing scarfWorn
245 gp
386 Demon maskWorn
230 gp387 Eyes of the eagle
Worn
250 gp389 Goggles of nightWorn
220 gp392 Greater hat of disguise
Worn
215 gp393 Lesser ring of energy 
resistance
Worn
245 gp
404 Ring of liesWorn
215 gp404 Slippers of spider climbingWorn
215 gp407 Tourmaline sphere aeon 
stoneUWorn
250 gp3817th-Level Treasure
Category
PricePageSpellstrike ammunition 3rd
Ammunition38 gp408+2 magic armorArmor 360 gp397 Horseshoes of speedCompanion340 gp394 Anchor feather tokenConsumable45 gp389 Candle of revealing
Consumable40 gp384 Bag of holding type IIHeld300 gp382 Bottled airHeld320 gp383 Giant wasp venom
Poison
45 gp365 Malyass root paste
Poison
40 gp366 Potion of disguise
Potion
40 gp402 Young dragon's breath 
potionPotion
45 gp388+2 armor potencyRune300 gp371 Scroll of 4th-level spell
Scroll
45 gp378 Expert heavy steel sturdy 
shieldShield340 gp411 Mentalist's stafl
Stafi360 gp398STafl of fire
Stafi360 gp409 Lesser stafl of healing
Stafi360 gp409 Eflervescent ampoule
Trinket
42 gp388 Murderer's knot
Trinket
45 gp398 Swift block cabochon
UTrinket
44 gp
411 Alchemist gogglesWorn
345 gp381 Boots of boundingWorn
340 gp383 Gloves of storing
UWorn
340 gp392 Healer's gloves
Worn
340 gp393 Lesser ring of wizardry
UWorn
360 gp404 Master handwraps of mighty fists
Worn
360 gp3933517th-Level Treasure (cont.)
Category
PricePageNecklace of fireballs type II
Worn
115 gp398 Phylactery of faithfulnessWorn
320 gp4008th-Level Treasure
Category
PricePageExplosive ammunition
Ammunition60 gp389 Javelin of lightning
Consumable54 gp396 Swan boat feather token
Consumable54 gp390 Elixir of lifeElixir60 gp364 Candle of truthUHeld50 gp384 Baleful oilOil60 gp382 Blessed oilOil60 gp383 Nettleweed residue
Poison
55 gp366 Wyvern poison
Poison
60 gp369 Greater healing potion
Potion
60 gp394 Potion of fiying
Potion
60 gp402+2 weapon potency
Rune400 gp371 InvisibilityRune500 gp374
Wand of 4th-level spell
Wand
405 gp380+2 magic weapon
Weapon
500 gp397 Bracers of armor 4th
Worn
475 gp
383 Clear spindle aeon stoneUWorn
425 gp380+2 handwraps of mighty 
fistsWorn
500 gp393 Lesser spell duelist's gloves
Worn
500 gp407 Lesser spell duelist's wand
Worn
500 gp4079th-Level Treasure
Category
PricePageSpellstrike ammunition 4thAmmunition75 gp408 Rhino hideArmor 640 gp403 Collar of inconspicuousnessCompanion625 gp385 Dust of disappearance
Consumable88 gp388 Whip feather tokenConsumable90 gp390 Bestial mutagenUElixir90 gp361 Bullheaded mutagenUElixir90 gp362 Cognitive mutagen
UElixir90 gp363 Juggernaut mutagenUElixir90 gp365 Quicksilver mutagen
UElixir90 gp367 Silvertongue mutagen
UElixir90 gp368 Horn of blastingUHeld700 gp394 Immovable rod
UHeld600 gp394 Adamantine battleaxe
Nonmagical700 gp356 Lich dustPoison
80 gp366 Spider root
Poison
80 gp369 Potion of resistance
Potion
80 gp402 Corrosive
Rune700 gp372 Energy resistant
Rune680 gp373 FlamingRune700 gp373 Frost
Rune700 gp373 ShockRune700 gp375 Scroll of 5th-level spell
Scroll
90 gp379 Dragonslayer's shield
UShield670 gp388 Forge warden
UShield690 gp390 Master heavy steel sturdy shield
Shield675 gp411STafl of abjuration
Stafi700 gp408STafl of conjuration
Stafi700 gp408STafl of divinationStafi700 gp408STafl of enchantmentStafi700 gp4099th-Level Treasure (cont.)
Category
PricePageStafl of evocation
Stafi700 gp409STafl of illusionStafi700 gp410STafl of necromancy
Stafi700 gp410STafl of transmutation
Stafi700 gp410 Gallows tooth
Trinket
88 gp392 Iron medallion
Trinket
80 gp396 Vanishing coin
Trinket
85 gp412 Gloom bladeWeapon
700 gp392 Armbands of athleticismWorn
145 gp381 Belt of the five kings
UWorn
650 gp383 Cloak of the batUWorn
660 gp385 Knapsack of halflingkindUWorn
675 gp396 Necklace of fireballs type III
Worn
300 gp398 Ring of wizardry
UWorn
700 gp40410th-Level Treasure
Category
PricePagePenetrating ammunition
Ammunition125 gp400STorm arrow
Ammunition125 gp411 Breastplate of command
Armor 960 gp384 Celestial armorArmor1,000 gp384 Demon armorArmor1,000 gp386 Electric eelskinArmor950 gp389 Elemental gemConsumable120 gp389 True antidote
Elixir110 gp361 True antiplague
Elixir110 gp361 Maestro's instrument
Held950 gp397 Oil of keen edgesUOil125 gp399 Shadow essence
Poison
125 gp368 Wolfsbane
Poison
110 gp369 Greater potion of disguise
UPotion
120 gp402 Potion of tongues
UPotion
100 gp403 Greater invisibility
Rune1,000 gp374
Master light adamantine sturdy shield
UShield1,000 gp411 Emerald grasshopper
Trinket
115 gp389 Flame tongueWeapon
1,000 gp390 Oathbow
Weapon
1,000 gp399 Cloak of elvenkind
Worn
1,000 gp385 Daredevil boots
Worn
900 gp386 Druid's vestments
Worn
1,000 gp388 Gold nodule aeon stoneUWorn
875 gp380 Greater goggles of night
Worn
900 gp392 Messenger's ring
Worn
880 gp398 Ring of counterspellsUWorn
925 gp403 Ring of energy resistance
Worn
975 gp404 Ring of maniacal devices
Worn
975 gp40411th-Level Treasure
Category
PricePageSpellstrike ammunition 5thAmmunition150 gp408+3 magic armorArmor 1,400 gp
397 Bag of holding type IIIHeld1,200 gp382 Greater divine prayer beads
UHeld1,400 gp
387 Oil of animationUOil175 gp399 Greater salve of antiparalysis
Oil150 gp406 Blightburn resin
Poison
160 gp362 Anarchic
Rune1,400 gp
371+3 armor potencyRune730 gp37135211th-Level Treasure (cont.)
Category
PricePageAxiomaticRune1,400 gp
372 HolyRune1,400 gp
374
UnholyRune1,400 gp
375 Scroll of 6th-level spell
Scroll
175 gp379 Arrow-catching shield
Shield1,350 gp382 Greater mentalist's stafl
Stafi1,400 gp
398 Greater stafl of fire
Stafi1,400 gp
409STafl of healingStafi1,400 gp
409 Greater verdant stafl
Stafi1,400 gp
412 Mending latticeUTrinket
170 gp397 Cape of the mountebankUWorn
1,300 gp384 Gorget of the primal roar
Worn
1,250 gp392 Greater doubling rings
Worn
1,300 gp387 Necklace of fireballs type IV
Worn
700 gp398 Robe of the archmagi
UWorn
1,400 gp
40612th-Level Treasure
Category
PricePageGreater explosive ammunition
Ammunition250 gp389 Mail of luckArmor 1,900 gp397 Greater elixir of life
Elixir250 gp364 Doctor's marvelous medicine
Held1,800 gp387 Master elven chain
UNonmagical2,000 gp356 Mithril chain shirtUNonmagical1,800 gp356 Slumber winePoison
250 gp369 Adult dragon's breath potion
Potion
250 gp388 Major healing potionPotion
250 gp394 Fortification
Rune2,000 gp373+3 weapon potency
Rune1,175 gp
371 Master heavy adamantine sturdy shield
UShield1,800 gp411 Alabaster reliquary
Trinket
250 gp381 Dazing tremblant
Trinket
225 gp386 Obsidian reliquary
Trinket
250 gp399+3 magic weapon
Weapon
2,000 gp397 Bracers of armor 6th
Worn
1,900 gp383 Greater ring of the ram
Worn
1,950 gp404 Greater ring of wizardry
UWorn
2,000 gp404+3 handwraps of mighty fists
Worn
2,000 gp393 Pink rhomboid aeon stoneUWorn
1,900 gp381 Ring of climbingWorn
1,750 gp
403 Ring of swimmingWorn
1,750 gp
404 Spell duelist's gloves
Worn
2,000 gp407 Spell duelist's wand
Worn
2,000 gp407 Winged bootsWorn
2,000 gp41313th-Level Treasure
Category
PricePageSpellstrike ammunition 6thAmmunition325 gp408 Plate armor of the deepUArmor 2,800 gp400 Barding of the zephyr
Companion2,800 gp382 Greater bestial mutagen
UElixir400 gp361 Greater bullheaded mutagen
UElixir400 gp362 Greater cognitive mutagen
UElixir400 gp363 Greater juggernaut mutagen
UElixir400 gp366 Greater quicksilver mutagen
UElixir400 gp367 Greater silvertongue 
mutagenUElixir400 gp368 Bag of holding type IVHeld2,400 gp
38213th-Level Treasure (cont.)
Category
PricePageGreater skeleton key
Held2,400 gp
407 Deathcap powder
Poison
360 gp364 Purple worm venom
Poison
400 gp367 Greater potion of resistance
Potion
360 gp402 Panacea
UPotion
350 gp400 Greater energy resistant
Rune2,900 gp373 Greater slick
Rune2,400 gp
375 Keen
URune3,000 gp374
Spell storingURune3,000 gp375 Scroll of 7th-level spell
Scroll
400 gp378 Floating shieldUShield2,800 gp390 Greater stafl of abjuration
Stafi3,000 gp408 Greater stafl of conjuration
Stafi3,000 gp408 Greater stafl of divination
Stafi3,000 gp408 Greater stafl of enchantment
Stafi3,000 gp409 Greater stafl of evocation
Stafi3,000 gp409 Greater stafl of illusion
Stafi3,000 gp410 Greater stafl of necromancy
Stafi3,000 gp410 Greater stafl of transmutation
Stafi3,000 gp410 Sunstone beadsTrinket
400 gp411 Dwarven thrower
Weapon
3,000 gp388 Greater boots of elvenkind
Worn
2,850 gp383 Greater choker of elocution
Worn
2,400 gp
385 Greater clandestine cloak
UWorn
2,900 gp385 Greater coyote cloak
Worn
2,500 gp386 Greater crafter's eyepiece
Worn
2,700 gp
386 Greater phylactery of 
faithfulnessWorn
2,800 gp400 Greater ring of lies
Worn
2,600 gp404 Greater tracker's goggles
Worn
2,600 gp411 Necklace of fireballs type V
Worn
1,600 gp399 Pale lavender ellipsoid aeon 
stoneUWorn
2,400 gp
38114th-Level Treasure
Category
PricePageGhost ammunitionAmmunition550 gp392STone bulletUAmmunition600 gp410 Greater horseshoes of speed
Companion4,250 gp394 Greater primeval mistletoe
Held4,250 gp403 Greater potion of fiying
Potion
600 gp402 Truesight potion
Potion
500 gp412 AntimagicURune4,400 gp
372 DancingURune4,500 gp372 Greater corrosive
Rune4,500 gp372 Greater fiaming
Rune4,500 gp373 Greater frost
Rune4,500 gp373 Greater shadow
Rune3,900 gp374
Greater shock
Rune4,500 gp375 Viper's fang
Trinket
550 gp412 Holy avenger
UWeapon
4,500 gp394 Anklets of alacrityWorn
4,500 gp381 Belt of giant strength
Worn
4,500 gp382 Belt of regeneration
Worn
4,500 gp382 Circlet of persuasion
Worn
4,500 gp385 Diadem of intellectWorn
4,500 gp387 Greater boots of bounding
Worn
4,250 gp38335314th-Level Treasure (cont.)
Category
PricePageGreater cloak of the bat
UWorn
4,000 gp385 Greater dancing scarf
Worn
4,450 gp
386 Greater demon mask
Worn
4,100 gp
387 Greater hat of the magi
Worn
4,200 gp393 Greater phylactery of the 
occultWorn
4,250 gp400 Greater ring of energy 
resistance
Worn
4,400 gp
404 Headband of inspired wisdom
Worn
4,500 gp393 Major ring of wizardry
UWorn
4,500 gp40415th-Level Treasure
Category
PricePageDisintegration bolt
UAmmunition800 gp387 Spellstrike ammunition 7thAmmunition700 gp408+4 magic armorArmor 6,500 gp397 Obfuscation oilOil700 gp399 Dragon bilePoison
720 gp364 Insanity mistPoison
800 gp365+4 armor potencyRune5,100 gp
371 Greater disrupting
URune6,200373 Void
URune6,500 gp375 Scroll of 8th-level spell
Scroll
800 gp378 Greater stafl of healing
Stafi6,500 gp409 Ghost dustTrinket
750 gp392 Greater healer's gloves
Worn
6,000 gp393 Greater persona mask
Worn
6,450 gp
400 Legendary handwraps of 
mighty fistsWorn
6,500 gp393 Necklace of fireballs type VI
Worn
4,200 gp39916th-Level Treasure
Category
PricePageTrue elixir of life
Elixir1,200 gp364 Greater thurible of revelation
Held9,500 gp411 Brimstone fumesPoison
1,200 gp362 Nightmare vapor
Poison
1,200 gp367 True healing potion
Potion
1,200 gp394 SpeedRRune10,000 gp375+4 weapon potency
Rune8,000 gp371STafl of power
RStafi10,000 gp410 Greater flame tongue
Weapon
9,000 gp390+4 magic weapon
Weapon
10,000 gp397 Bracers of armor 8th
Worn
9,400 gp
383 Greater alchemist goggles
Worn
10,000 gp381 Greater spell duelist's gloves
Worn
10,000 gp407 Greater spell duelist's wand
Worn
10,000 gp407+4 handwraps of mighty fists
Worn
10,000 gp393 Orange prism aeon stone
UWorn
9,750 gp
38117th-Level Treasure
Category
PricePageSpellstrike ammunition 8thAmmunition1,600 gp408 True bestial mutagen
UElixir2,000 gp361 True bullheaded mutagen
UElixir2,000 gp362 True cognitive mutagen
UElixir2,000 gp364 True juggernaut mutagen
UElixir2,000 gp366 True quicksilver mutagen
UElixir2,000 gp367 True silvertongue mutagen
UElixir2,000 gp368 HemlockPoison
1,800 gp365 Wyrm dragon's breath potion
Potion
2,000 gp38817th-Level Treasure (cont.)
Category
PricePageEthereal
URune13,500 gp373 Vorpal
RRune15,000 gp375 Scroll of 9th-level spell
Scroll
2,000 gpLegendary heavy steel 
sturdy shield
Shield14,000 gp411 reflecting shield
UShield13,000 gp403 Spell sliver
Trinket
1,900 gp407 Greater armbands of 
athleticismWorn
13,000 gp381 Greater daredevil boots
Worn
14,000 gp386 Greater messenger's ring
Worn
14,000 gp398 Necklace of fireballs type VII
Worn
9,600 gp399 Robe of eyes
UWorn
13,000 gp406 Whisper of the first lieWorn
14,000 gp41318th-Level Treasure
Category
PricePageGreater doctor's marvelous 
medicineHeld21,000 gp387 Possibility tome
Held20,000 gp402 Virtuoso's instrument
Held23,000 gp413 Orichalcum starknifeRNonmagical18,000 gp356 King's sleep
Poison
3,000 gp366 Greater fortification
Rune24,000 gp
373 Indestructible shieldRShield23,000 gp394 Legendary heavy adamantine 
sturdy shield
UShield22,500 gp411 Greater cloak of elvenkind
Worn
24,000 gp
385 Greater ring of maniacal 
devices
Worn
4,250 gp40419th-Level Treasure
Category
PricePageSpellstrike ammunition 9thAmmunition4,000 gp408+5 magic armorArmor 
40,000 gp397 Legendary elven chain
UNonmagical36,000 gp356 Black lotus extract
Poison
5,000 gp362+5 armor potencyRune27,360 gp
371 Luck bladeRWeapon
30,000 gp396 Mattock of the titansUWeapon
40,000 gp397 Sky hammerRWeapon
40,000 gp407 Greater robe of the 
archmagi
UWorn
40,000 gp406 Inexplicable apparatus
Worn
32,000 gp394 Lavender and green ellipsoid 
aeon stoneUWorn
30,000 gp381THird eye
Worn
40,000 gp41120th-Level Treasure
Category
PricePageElixir of rejuvenation
UElixir—365 Antimagic oilROil9,000 gp381 Tears of death
Poison
9,000 gp369+5 weapon potency
Rune53,860 gp371 Philosopher's stone
UTool
—367+5 magic weapon
Weapon
70,000 gp397 Bracers of armor 10th
Worn
65,000 gp383+5 handwraps of mighty fists
Worn
70,000 gp393 Supreme spell duelist's gloves
Worn
70,000 gp407 Supreme spell duelist's wand
Worn
70,000 gp407 Greater whisper of the first lie
UWorn
60,000 gp413354 Most items are made from readily available materials—usually leather, wood, and steel—but weapons and armor 
can be made from more exotic materials, giving them 
unique properties and other advantages. Weapons made 
from special materials are better able to harm certain 
magical creatures that have powerful defenses, and armor 
made of these materials can provide enhanced protection 
from such foes. 
A weapon or suit of armor can be made from no more 
than one special material, and it must be of at least expert 
quality. Some rare and exotic materials might require 
master or even legendary quality, as listed in the material's 
Requirements entry. The Price of the material depends 
on its scarcity, the difficulty of working with it, and the 
quality of the item to be produced. Items of higher quality 
require more refined versions of a material, even if they 
contain the same amount of that material; these purer 
materials make the items significantly more expensive. If an item made from a special material has its quality 
improved, the crafter must also pay for the increased Price 
of the material; otherwise, the weapon no longer counts 
as being made of that material and gains none of that 
material's benefits. In this case, the original cost of the 
special material is lost and cannot be recovered. Most materials are metals, meaning that most weapons 
and some suits of armor can be made out of them. The 
GM is the final arbiter of what items can be made using 
what material. ARMOR BULKBecause armor's Bulk is reduced when the armor is worn, 
use its carried Bulk when determining its material Price. AMMUNITIONUse the Price listed for an item of light Bulk when crafting 
ammunition. This Price is for 10 pieces of ammunition. HARDNESSThe table below provides the Hardness for some types of 
common materials. Use the thin Hardness for shields and thin items and the regular Hardness for sturdier objects such as armor. The Hardness for doors, reinforced 
structures, and other durable constructions is usually twice the Hardness listed on the table. Special materials list their Hardness values, including structure Hardness. Greater skill in crafting produces objects with greater Hardness than the listed values (see page 190). Any damage dealt to an object with 0 Hardness destroys it. Stone is a catchall for a variety of hard stones, such as 
granite and marble. Likewise, wood covers a variety of 
ordinary woods, such as oak and pine. Metal weapons 
and armor are assumed to be made of iron or steel unless 
noted otherwise. Material
Hardness
Thin paper0 Paper1THin cloth1THin glass1 Cloth2 Glass2THin rope
2THin leather
2THin wood
3 Leather
4 Rope
4THin stone4THin iron or steel
5 Wood
5STone7 Iron or steel
9 SPECIAL MATERIALS
Materials with the special trait can be substituted for base materials. You could, for instance, make a hammer's 
head of adamantine instead of iron. Their Prices give the full Price of a nonmagical item made of that material. 
This is higher than that of a typical item because you need a supply of the expensive special material and must invest more time or money working with the material. CRAFT
IN
G WITH
 SPEC
IAL MATER
IALSWhen you Craft an item that incorporates a special material, 
the initial investment you make in the item must consist of 
that material. For instance, a master-quality adamantine 
item of light Bulk costs 600 gp. The 300 gp of raw materials 
you provide when you start to Craft the item must consist of 
adamantine. The raw materials you spend to complete the 
item don't have to consist of the special material, though the 
GM might rule otherwise in certain cases. ADAMANTINE
 MATERIAL
Requirements
 The item is master quality or better.
Mined from rocks that fell from the heavens, adamantine is one of 
the hardest metals known. It has a shiny black appearance, and it 
is prized for its amazing resiliency and ability to hold an incredibly 
sharp edge. Weapons made from adamantine treat any object they 
hit as if it had half as much Hardness as usual unless the object's 
Hardness is greater than that of the adamantine weapon. 
PriceQualityLight BulkBulk 1+Master600 gp700 gp/BulkLegendary
13,000 gp15,000 gp/BulkHardness
ThicknessMasterLegendary
Thin item1013 Item1417STructure
2834 SpecialMATERIALS
355 COLD IRON
 MATERIAL
Requirements
 The item is expert quality or better.
Weapons made from cold iron are deadly to demons and fey alike. 
It looks just like normal iron, but it is mined from particularly 
pure sources and shaped with little or no heat. Known for their 
resistance to magic, weapons and armor made from cold iron 
can hold one fewer property rune than their iron counterparts. 
Weapons made from cold iron deal additional damage to creatures 
with weakness to cold iron, and a creature with weakness to cold 
iron that critically fails an unarmed attack against a creature in 
cold iron armor becomes sick 1 for 1 round.
PriceQualityLight BulkBulk 1+Expert50 gp60 gp/BulkMaster400 gp500 gp/BulkLegendary
8,500 gp10,000 gp/BulkHardness
ThicknessExpertMasterLegendary
Thin item5710 Item91114STructure
182228 DARKWOOD
 MATERIAL
Requirements
 The item is master quality or better.
Darkwood is an exceptionally light type of wood, dark as ebony 
but with a slight purple tint in places. Darkwood armor is easier 
to wear than normal wood or metal armor, reducing its check 
penalty by 1 (minimum
 0). In addition, a darkwood item's Bulk 
is reduced by 1 (or to light Bulk if its normal Bulk is 1, with no 
efiect on an item that normally has light Bulk). The Price of this 
material is based on the item's normal Bulk, not its reduced Bulk 
for being made of darkwood, but reduce the Bulk before making 
any further Bulk adjustments for the size of the item.
PriceQualityLight BulkBulk 1+Master500 gp600 gp/BulkLegendary
11,000 gp12,000 gp/BulkHardness
ThicknessExpertMasterLegendary
Thin item358 Item5710STructure
101420 MITHRAL 
 MATERIAL
Requirements
 The item is master quality or better.
Mithral is renowned for its lightness and durability. It has the same 
sheen as silver but has a slightly lighter hue. Mithral weapons and 
armor are treated as if they were silver for purpose of damaging 
creatures with weakness to silver. Mithral armor is easier to wear, 
reducing its check penalty by 1 (minimum 0). In addition, a metal 
item made of mithral is lighter than one made of iron or steel: the 
item's Bulk is reduced by 1 (reduced to light Bulk if its normal 
SpecialSpecialSpecialBulk is 1, with no efiect on an item that normally has light Bulk). 
The Price of this material is based on the item's normal Bulk, not its 
reduced Bulk for being made of mithral, but reduce the Bulk before 
making any further Bulk adjustments for the size of the item.
PriceQualityLight BulkBulk 1+Master500 gp600 gp/BulkLegendary
11,000 gp12,000 gp/BulkHardness
ThicknessMasterLegendary
Thin item58 Item912STructure
1824 ORICHALCUM
 MATERIAL
Requirements 
The item is legendary quality.
The rarest and most valuable skymetal, orichalcum is highly 
sought after for its incredible magical properties related to time. 
It has a dull, coppery color. Orichalcum weapons can have four 
magic property runes instead of three. Etching the 
speed weapon 
property rune onto an orichalcum weapon costs half the normal 
Price. If you are wearing armor made of orichalcum, you gain a 
+1 circumstance bonus to initiative rolls, as the armor grants you 
insight into the future. One day after taking 1 or more Dents, an 
item made from orichalcum repairs itself completely.
PriceQualityLight BulkBulk 1+Legendary
18,000 gp20,000 gp/BulkThicknessHardness
Thin item16 Item18STructure
35 SILVER
 MATERIAL
Requirements
 The item is expert quality or better.
Silver weapons are a bane to creatures from devils to werewolves. 
Silver items are less durable than steel items. Silver weapons deal 
additional damage to creatures with weakness to silver, and a 
creature with weakness to silver that critically fails an unarmed 
attack against a creature in silver armor becomes sick 1 for 1 round.
PriceQualityLight BulkBulk 1+Expert50 gp60 gp/BulkMaster400 gp500 gp/BulkLegendary
8,500 gp10,000 gp/Bulk Hardness
ThicknessExpertMasterLegendary
Thin item358 Item5710STructure
101420 SpecialSpecial356 Adamantine slices through the toughest substances. A 
chain shirt made of mithral is incredibly light and supple. 
Though these items aren't magically enchanted, they still 
have great value and prestige. The following items are 
made of the special materials found on pages 354–355.ADAMANTINE BATTLEAXE
 ITEM 
7 Price 700 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1THis adamantine battleaxe is of master quality, giving you a 
+2 item bonus to attack rolls using the weapon. This axe is not 
magical, and it has Hardness 10. If the weapon is used to attack 
an object with Hardness 10 or less, that Hardness is halved 
before applying the damage to the object.
This axe can be made into a magic weapon and have up to two 
weapon property runes added to it.
Craft Requirements
 The raw materials must include 350 gp of 
adamantine. COLD IRON WARHAMMER
 ITEM 
2 Price 60 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1THis cold iron warhammer is of expert quality, giving you a +1 
item bonus to attack rolls using the weapon. This warhammer is 
not magical, and it has Hardness 5.
This warhammer can be made into a magic weapon, but it 
cannot have any weapon property runes added to it (due to it 
being made from cold iron).
Craft Requirements
 The raw materials must include 30 gp of 
cold iron.
ELVEN CHAIN
 ITEM 
7+Method of Use worn, armor; 
Bulk 1 Elven chain is a chain shirt made of mithral that glitters in 
even the faintest light. Created by elven artisans employing 
ancient crafting techniques, the armor is exceptionally quiet. 
Unlike other chain shirts, elven chain does not have the 
noisy trait. Type
 master; Level
 7; Price 2,000 gp; Craft Requirements
 The raw materials must include 900 gp of mithral.
The elven chain is master quality.
Type
 legendary; Level
 15; Price 36,000 gp; Craft Requirements
 The raw materials must include 18,000 gp of mithral.
The elven chain is legendary quality.
MITHRAL CHAIN SHIRT
 ITEM 
7 Price 1,800 gpMethod of Use worn, armor; 
Bulk 1THis mithral chain shirt is of master quality, and it does not 
impose an armor check penalty. This chain shirt is not magical, 
and it has Hardness 9.
This suit of armor can be made into a magic suit of armor and have up to two armor property runes added to it.
Craft Requirements
 The raw materials must include 900 gp of 
mithral. ORICHALCUM STARKNIFE
 ITEM 
15
Price 18,000 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LThis orichalcum starknife is of legendary quality, giving you a +3 
item bonus to attack rolls using the weapon. This starknife is not 
magical, and it has Hardness 16. One day after taking any Dents, 
this starknife completely repairs itself.
This starknife can be made into a magic weapon and have up 
to four weapon property runes added to it.
Craft Requirements
 The raw materials must include 9,000 gp 
of orichalcum. SILVER DAGGER
 ITEM 
2 Price 50 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LThis silver dagger is of expert quality, giving you a +1 item bonus 
to attack rolls using the weapon. This dagger is not magical and 
it has Hardness 3.
This dagger can be made into a magic weapon and have up to 
one weapon property rune added to it.
Craft Requirements
 The raw materials must include 25 gp 
of silver.
SPECIAL NONMAGICAL ITEMS
ELVEN CHAIN
357 Snares are small annoyances and simple traps you can 
create using the Crafting skill if you have the Snare 
Crafting feat (see page 171). Creating a snare typically 
requires a snare kit (see page 187) and some amount of 
snare components. Unlike other crafted items, found 
snares cannot be collected or sold in their complete form. 
Snares always have the snare trait. CRAFTING SNARES
A snare is built within a single 5-foot square and, once 
constructed, can't be moved without destroying (and 
often triggering) the snare. 
You must have the Snare Crafting feat to create snares. 
You can spend 1 minute to Craft a snare at its full listed 
Price. If you want to Craft a snare at a discount, it still 
requires the usual amount of downtime indicated in the 
Craft activity. Some snares have additional requirements 
beyond those stated in the Craft activity; these snares list 
their requirements in a Craft Requirements entry.
DETECTING SNARES
Creatures can detect snares as they would any trap or 
hazard (see page 341), using the creator's Craft DC as 
the snare's Stealth DC. As you become more skilled in 
creating snares, they become harder to detect by those 
with lesser ability. If your proficiency rank in Crafting 
is expert, only creatures trained or better in Perception 
can find your snares and only creatures trained or better 
in Thievery can disarm them; if your proficiency rank in 
Crafting is master, only creatures that are expert or better 
in Perception can find your snares and only creatures that 
are expert or better in Thievery can disarm them; and 
if your proficiency rank in Crafting is legendary, only 
creatures that have a rank of master or better in Perception 
can find your snares and only creatures that have a rank 
of master or better in Thievery can disarm them. If your proficiency rank is expert or better in Crafting, 
only creatures actively searching can find your snares. 
TRIGGERING SNARES
Unless stated otherwise in a snare's description, when a 
Small or larger creature enters a snare's square, the snare's 
effect occurs and then the snare is destroyed. DISABLING SNARES
Once you discover a snare, you can disable it much like 
other physical traps, using the Disable a Device use of the 
Thievery skill and using the Craft DC of the snare's creator 
as the DC. On a critical success, you gain a partial version 
of the snare that you can take with you. Any creature with 
the formula for that snare can use a partial snare in place 
of half the Price to Craft the same snare again elsewhere. You can disarm a snare that you've created without 
setting it off by spending an Interact action while adjacent 
to the snare. SNARES
The following snares are available to purchase or Craft. ALARM SNARE 
1 Price 2 gpAn alarm snare sounds when a Small or smaller 
creature enters the snare's square. The snare 
then makes a loud noise that can be heard by all 
creatures within 100 to 500 feet of the snare (you 
choose how loud the snare is and the distance at which it can be 
heard when you create the snare). 
BITING SNARE
 SNARE 
4 Price 10 gpA biting snare acts as dificult terrain until a 
creature enters its square. That creature must then 
attempt a DC 18 Reffiex save. 
Success The target is unafiected. Failure
 The target takes 1d8 piercing damage.
Critical Failure
 The target takes 2d8 piercing damage and is 
hampered 10 until it recovers at least 1 Hit Point.
CALTROP SNARE
 SNARE 
1 Price 2 gpThis trap consists of a hidden canister of caltrops 
(see page 184) attached to a trip wire. When the 
trap is triggered, it ffiings the caltrops into a square 
adjacent to the trap. You choose which square when you set up 
the snare.
If the caltrops scatter into the same square as a creature, that 
creature must attempt the Acrobatics check immediately.
Craft Requirements
 caltrops
EXPLODING SNARE
 SNARE 
8 Price 50 gpYou set a trio of alchemist's fire bombs to explode 
in unison when a creature enters the exploding 
snare's square. The target must attempt a DC 22 
Reffiex save. 
Success The target takes 1d8 fire damage.
Critical Success The target is unafiected. Failure
 The target takes 3d8 fire damage and 3 persistent 
fire
 damage. Critical Failure
 The target takes 6d8 fire damage and 3 
persistent fire damage.
Craft Requirements
 three vials of alchemist's fire
FREEZING SNARE
 SNARE 
8 Price 50 gpYou set a trio of liquid ice bombs to explode 
in unison when a creature enters the freezing 
snare's square. The target must attempt a DC 22 
Reffiex
 save. 
Auditory
ConsumableMechanicalSnare
Trap
ConsumableMechanicalSnare
Trap
ConsumableMechanicalSnare
Trap
ConsumableFire
MechanicalSnare
Trap
ColdConsumableMechanicalSnare
Trap
SNARES
358 Success The target takes 1d8 cold damage. Critical Success The target is unafiected. Failure
 The target takes 3d8 cold damage and is hampered 10 
until the end of its next turn.
Critical Failure
 The target takes 6d8 cold damage and is 
hampered 10 until the end of its next turn.
Craft Requirements
 three vials of liquid ice
HOBBLING SNARE
 SNARE 
4 Price 10 gpA hobbling snare acts as dificult terrain until a 
creature has entered its square. That creature must 
then attempt a DC 18 Reffiex save. 
Success The target is unafiected. Failure
 The target is hampered 10 for 1 minute or until it 
regains at least 1 Hit Point.
Critical Failure
 The target is hampered 20 for 1 minute or until 
it regains at least 1 Hit Point.
LIGHTNING SNARE
 SNARE 
8 Price 50 gpYou set a trio of bottled lightning bombs to explode 
in unison when a creature enters the lightning 
snare's square. The target must attempt a DC 22 
Reffiex save. 
Success The target takes 1d6 electricity damage. Critical Success The target is unafiected. Failure
 The target takes 3d6 electricity damage and is flat-
footed for 1 round.
Critical Failure
 The target takes 6d6 electricity damage and is 
fflat-footed for 1 round.
Craft Requirements
 three vials of bottled lightning
MARKING SNARE
 SNARE 
1 Price 2 gpWhen you create this snare, you must decide 
whether to make the snare a dye or a scent 
marker. Either type of marking grants a +2 
circumstance bonus to track the creature for up to 24 hours 
or until dye or scent is washed ofi (requiring at least a gallon 
of water and 10 minutes of scrubbing). A creature that enters 
a square of the marking snare must attempt a DC 17 Reffiex 
saving throw.
Success The target is unafiected. Failure
 The snare marks the target.
Critical Failure
 The snare marks the target, and the target is 
blinded until the end of its next turn.
SIGNALING SNARE
 SNARE 
1 Price 2 gpWhen a creature enters a square of a signaling 
snare, nothing happens to the creature, but instead 
it causes a small, easily missed disruption to the terrain that allows the snare's creator or another creature who 
knows what to look for to determine whether a creature of the 
appropriate size entered the square.
ConsumableMechanicalSnare
Trap
ConsumableElectricityMechanicalSnare
Trap
ConsumableMechanicalSnare
Trap
ConsumableMechanicalSnare
Trap
SLOWING SNARE
 SNARE 
1 Price 2 gpA square with this snare becomes difficult 
terrain when the first creature enters it, and 
then it is destroyed. 
STALKER BANE SNARE
 SNARE 
4 Price 10 gpThis snare explodes with a burst of cloying powder 
that can cling to a creature stepping into its square. 
A creature that enters a square of the stalker bane 
snare must attempt a DC 20 Reffiex save. 
Success The target is unafiected. Failure
 Powder sticks to the target, causing it to leave behind 
telltale footprints. If the target is or becomes invisible, 
creatures that would otherwise be unable to see it count it as 
sensed without spending an action to find it. 
Critical Failure
 Powder clumps on the target, constantly ffiaking 
away. If the target is or becomes invisible, creatures that would 
otherwise be unable to see it count it as concealed instead. STRIKING SNARE
 SNARE 
8 Price 50 gpYou set a group of either stones or wooden stakes to 
strike a creature that enters the snare's square. The 
creature must attempt a DC 22 Reffiex saving throw. 
If you choose stones, the snare deals bludgeoning damage; if you 
choose spikes, it deals piercing damage. 
Success The target takes 1d8 damage. Critical Success The target is unafiected. Failure
 The target takes 3d8 damage. Critical Failure
 The target takes 6d8 damage. TRIP SNARE
 SNARE 
4 Price 10 gpYou set a cunning wire to trip a creature. A Medium 
or smaller creature that enters this snare's square 
must attempt a DC 18 Reffiex save. If you want to 
create a trip snare to trip larger creatures, you must create a 
group of contiguous snares of a size equal to the space of that 
larger creature. For instance, a square-shaped group of four 
contiguous trip snares in a 10-foot-by-10-foot square can be used 
to trip a Large creature. 
Success The target is unafiected. Failure
 The target falls prone.
Critical Failure
 The target falls prone and takes 1d6 
bludgeoning damage. WARNING SNARE
 SNARE 
4 Price 10 gpThis snare is like an alarm snare, but its subtle 
sound blends into ambient noise. You can detect 
this sound as long as you're within 1,000 feet of the 
snare and aren't prevented from hearing it. Other 
creatures in that area who are searching might notice the sound 
if their Perception check result meets or exceeds your Craft DC.
ConsumableMechanicalSnare
Trap
ConsumableMechanicalSnare
Trap
ConsumableMechanicalSnare
Trap
ConsumableMechanicalSnare
Trap
Auditory
ConsumableMechanicalSnare
Trap
359 Alchemical items are not inherently magical but instead 
use the properties of volatile chemicals, exotic minerals, 
potent plants, and other substances, collectively referred 
to as alchemical reagents. As such, alchemical items don't 
radiate magical auras, and they can't be dispelled or 
dismissed. Their effects last for a set amount of time or 
until they are countered in some way, typically physically.
Sometimes the reactions of alchemical reagents create 
effects that seem magical, and at other times they straddle 
the line between purely reactive and the inexplicable. 
Some alchemical items require spending Resonance Points 
as part of their activation, and alchemists can use their 
Resonance Points to quickly craft and empower their 
own alchemical items. Even in these cases, alchemical 
items don't radiate magic auras, and they use a creature's 
Resonance Points as simply one additional catalyst to 
produce their alchemical effects. 
Alchemical items are activated in various ways. Most 
require one or more Operate Activation actions (see pages 
376–377); as with magic items, these activations require 
the expenditure of 1 Resonance Point unless specified 
otherwise. The Activation entry of each item indicates the 
action or actions required to activate it. 
Rules for creating alchemical items are found in the Craft 
activity on page 148, and you must have the Alchemical 
Crafting skill feat to use Crafting to create alchemical 
items. A critical failure when Crafting alchemical items 
often causes a dangerous effect in addition to losing some 
of the materials, such as an explosion for a bomb or 
accidental exposure for a poison. Some alchemical items 
have additional requirements beyond those stated in the 
Craft activity; these items list their requirements in a Craft 
Requirements entry.
All alchemical items have the alchemical trait. Most also 
have the consumable trait, which means that activating 
the item uses it up. The bomb, elixir, and poison traits 
indicate special categories of alchemical items, each of 
which is described further below. An alchemical item 
without the bomb, elixir, and poison traits is referred to as 
an alchemical tool, which is also described on page 360.ALCHEMICAL BOMBS
An alchemical bomb combines volatile alchemical 
components that explode when the bomb hits a creature 
or object. Most alchemical bombs deal damage of a 
specified type and amount, though some produce more 
spectacular effects. Bombs always have the bomb trait. 
Bombs are martial thrown weapons with a range of 20 
feet. When you throw a bomb at a creature, you target 
its TAC. Strikes made to throw alchemical bombs gain 
the manipulate trait. Bombs don't need to be activated 
in the same way as other alchemical items, but drawing, 
preparing, and throwing a bomb takes one hand. Most bombs also have the splash trait. When you use a 
thrown weapon with the splash trait, you don't add your 
Strength modifier to the damage roll. If an attack with a 
splash weapon fails, succeeds, or critically succeeds, all 
creatures within 5 feet of the target take the listed amount 
of splash damage. On a failure (but not a critical failure), 
the target of the attack also takes the splash damage. You 
don't multiply splash damage on a critical hit.
ALCHEMICAL ELIXIRS
Elixirs have the elixir trait. These potent liquids are 
typically consumed and grant the drinker some alchemical 
benefits. While all elixirs follow the same general rules, 
mutagens (described below) have additional rules that 
apply to their use. 
ACT
IVAT
IN
G ELI
XIRS
You can activate an elixir by drinking it using the Operate 
Activation action, or you activate it by using the Interact action to feed it to another creature, which requires the target to spend the Resonance Points that would have been required for the Operate Activation. You can feed 
an elixir only to a creature that is paralyzed, unconscious, or willing. You usually need only one hand to consume 
an elixir or feed it to another creature. Many elixirs have an Onset entry. This specifies the 
amount of time that elapses between consuming the elixir 
and gaining its benefits. If this entry is absent, the elixir's 
effects take place immediately upon consumption. MUTAGE
NSThese uncommon elixirs, indicated by the mutagen trait, 
temporary transmogrify the subject's body and alter 
its mind. Most reasonable creatures avoid mutagens, 
associating the admixtures with fleshwarping and other 
terrifying alchemical abominations. Numerous folk stories 
feature ordinary people transformed into murderous 
brutes by these concoctions. Typically, only alchemists 
have the expertise to craft mutagens, and some would say 
they are the only ones reckless enough to use them. 
Mutagens differ from other elixirs in that each dose 
must be attuned to a specific individual to convey its full 
effects. The creator of the mutagen chooses a creature to 
attune the mutagen to at the time it is created; this typically 
involves including some bit of the attuned creature's body 
(such as hair, nail trimmings, saliva, and the like) as a 
reagent during the crafting process. 
Unlike other elixirs, mutagens convey a pair of effects: 
a benefit and a drawback. If you consume a mutagen that 
is not attuned to you, you gain its drawback but not its 
benefit. If it's attuned to you, you gain both effects. These 
both occur only after the mutagen's onset time has elapsed.
Mutagens are polymorph effects, meaning you can benefit from only one at a time (see page 418 for more information about the polymorph trait). Unlike other polymorph effects, however, you can suffer the drawbacks 
ALCHEMICAL ITEMS
360from multiple mutagens at one time. For instance, if you 
were already under the effect of a bestial mutagen and 
drink a quicksilver mutagen, after its onset time you would gain the benefit and drawback of the quicksilver mutagen, but you'd lose the benefit of the bestial mutagen while still retaining its drawback. ALCHEMICAL POISONS
Alchemical poisons are particularly potent toxins that 
have been distilled or extracted from natural sources and made either more powerful or easier to administer than their naturally occurring base toxin. Each of the alchemical poison entries listed in this section includes the Price and features for a single dose. Poison doses are typically kept in a vial or some other type of safe and secure container.
Applying alchemical poisons uses Operate Activation 
actions, but these activations don't cost Resonance Points. 
A poison typically requires one hand to pour into food or 
scatter in the air, or two hands to apply to a weapon or 
item. The Method of Use entry for a poison describes these 
typical means of application, but the GM might determine 
that using poisons in other ways functions differently.
The full rules for how poisons work begin on page 324. 
A creature attempts the listed saving throw as soon as 
it's exposed to the poison; only on a failed save does any 
listed onset time elapse, after which the creature begins 
suffering the poison's effects.
Some poisons have the virulent trait. This means the 
poison is harder to remove once it has taken effect; see 
Virulent Afflictions on page 325.
METHOD OF EXPOS
URE
Each alchemical poison has one of the following four 
traits, which define the way in which a creature can be 
exposed to that poison. ContactA contact poison activates when applied to an item or 
directly onto a living creature's skin. The first creature 
to touch the affected item must attempt a saving throw against the poison; a creature must attempt a saving throw immediately when the poison touches its skin if the poison is applied directly. Contact poisons are infeasible 
to apply to a creature via a weapon attack due to the logistics of delivering them without poisoning yourself. Typically, the onset time of a contact poison is 1 minute.
IngestedAnd ingested poison activates when applied to food or 
drink to be consumed by a living creature, or when placed 
directly into a living creature's mouth. A creature attempts 
a saving throw against such a poison when it consumes the 
poison or the food or drink treated with the poison. The 
onset time of ingested poisons typically ranges anywhere 
from 1 minute to 1 day.
InhaledAn inhaled poison activates when unleashed from its 
container. Once unleashed, the poison creates a cloud of 
gas filling a 10-foot cube lasting for 1 minute or until a 
strong wind dissipates the cloud. Every creature entering 
this cloud is exposed to the poison and must attempt a 
saving throw against it, unless that creature used the Take 
a Deep Breath action before entering the poison's cloud 
and continues holding its breath for the entire time it 
remains within the cloud. 
Injury
An injury poison activates when applied to a weapon, 
and it affects the target of the first Strike made using the 
poisoned weapon. If that Strike is a success or a critical 
success and deals piercing or slashing damage, the target 
must attempt a saving throw against the poison. If the 
Strike is a failure or a critical failure, or if it fails to deal 
slashing or piercing damage for some other reason, the 
poison is spent but the target is unaffected. ALCHEMICAL TOOLS
Alchemical tools have activated effects that affect items 
or are helpful in some other way. Alchemical tools are 
consumable items, but they usually don't require the 
user to spend Resonance Points when activating the 
item. CATALOG OF ALCHEMICAL ITEMS
The following includes bombs, elixirs, poisons, and tools. ACID FLASK
 ITEM 
1 Price 3 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LFlasks fllled with corrosive acid deal 1d4 persistent 
acid damage and 1 acid splash damage. ALCHEMIST'S FIRE
 ITEM 
1 Price 3 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LAlchemist's fire is combination of several volatile 
liquids that ignite when exposed to air, typically 
stored in a sealed ffiask. Alchemist's fire deals 1d8 
fire damage, 1 persistent fire damage, and 1 fire splash damage. 
The target can end this persistent damage by spending an Interact 
action or by becoming submerged in water or otherwise entering 
an area deprived of air. A creature adjacent to the target can also 
end the persistent damage by spending an Interact action.
ANTIDOTE
 ITEM 
1+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
Antidotes come in three different types: standard, 
greater, and true. Upon drinking a standard antidote, you gain a 
+2 item bonus to Fortitude saving throws against poisons and 
Acid
AlchemicalBombConsumableSplashAlchemicalBombConsumableFire
SplashAlchemicalConsumableElixir361venoms for 6 hours. A greater antidote grants a +4 item bonus 
to Fortitude saves against poisons and venoms for 6 hours. A 
true antidote grants a +4 item bonus to Fortitude saving throws 
against poisons and venoms for 6 hours, and when you consume 
a true antidote, you can immediately attempt a saving throw 
against one poison or venom of 10th level or lower aflicting you; 
if you succeed, the poison or venom is neutralized.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 1; Price 2 gpType 
greater; 
Level
 5; Price 15 gpType 
true; Level
 10; Price 110 gpANTIPLAGUE
 ITEM 
1+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate activation, no cost
Antiplague comes in three different types: 
standard, greater, and true. Upon drinking a standard antiplague, 
you gain a +2 item bonus to Fortitude saving throws against 
diseases for 24 hours; this applies to your daily save against 
a disease's progression. A greater antiplague grants a +4 item 
bonus to Fortitude saves against diseases for 24 hours. A true 
antiplague grants a +4 item bonus to Fortitude saving throws 
against diseases for 24 hours, and when you consume a true 
antiplague, you can immediately attempt a saving throw against 
one disease of 10th level or lower aflicting you; if you succeed, 
you are cured of the disease.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 1; Price 2 gpType 
greater; 
Level
 5; Price 15 gpType 
true; Level
 10; Price 110 gpARSENIC  ITEM 
1 Price 2 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation, no cost
You can't reduce your sick condition while afiected 
by arsenic.
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 15; 
Onset 10 minutes; Maximum Duration
 5 minutes; Stage 1 1 poison damage and sick 1 (1 minute); Stage 2 1d4 poison damage and sick 2 (1 minute); Stage 3 2d4 poison damage and sick 3 (1 minute)BELLADONNA ITEM 
2 Price 4 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 16; 
Onset 10 minutes; Maximum Duration 
30 minutes; Stage 1 dazzled (10 minutes); Stage 2 1d4 poison damage and sick 1 (10 minutes); 
Stage 3 1d4 poison damage, sick 1, and confused for 1 minute (1 minute)BESTIAL MUTAGEN
 ITEM 
9 Price 90 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset 1 minute For 10 minutes after the onset of this mutagen, 
your features transform into something bestial and 
you take on muscle mass, but your lumbering form is clumsy.
AlchemicalConsumableElixirAlchemicalConsumableIngestedPoison
AlchemicalConsumableIngestedPoison
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
benefit You gain a +3 item bonus to Athletics checks and 
unarmed attack rolls. Your damage dealt by unarmed 
attacks increases to four damage dice, unless it would 
otherwise have more damage dice.
Drawback 
You take a –1 item penalty to Acrobatics checks, 
Stealth checks, Thievery checks, Reffiex saves, and AC.
BESTIAL MUTAGEN, GREATER
 ITEM 
13
Price 400 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset 1 minute For 1 hour after the onset of this mutagen, your 
features transform into something bestial and you 
take on muscle mass, but your lumbering form is clumsy.
benefit You gain a +4 item bonus to Athletics checks and 
unarmed attack rolls. Your damage dealt by unarmed 
attacks increases to flve damage dice, unless it would 
otherwise have more damage dice.
Drawback 
You take a –1 item penalty to Acrobatics checks, 
Stealth checks, Thievery checks, Reffiex saves, and AC.
BESTIAL MUTAGEN, LESSER
 ITEM 
5 Price 20 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset end of 
your next turn
For 1 minute after the onset of this mutagen, your 
features transform into something bestial and you take on muscle 
mass, but your lumbering form is clumsy.
benefit You gain a +2 item bonus to Athletics checks and 
unarmed attack rolls. Your damage dealt by unarmed 
attacks increases to three damage dice, unless it would 
otherwise have more damage dice.
Drawback 
You take a –1 item penalty to Acrobatics checks, 
Stealth checks, Thievery checks, Reffiex saves, and AC.
BESTIAL MUTAGEN, TRUE
 ITEM 
17
Price 2,000 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset end of your next turn
For 1 hour after the onset of this mutagen, your 
features transform into something bestial and you take on muscle 
mass, but your lumbering form is clumsy.
benefit You gain a +5 item bonus to Athletics checks and 
unarmed attack rolls. Your damage dealt by unarmed 
attacks increases to six damage dice, unless it would 
otherwise have more damage dice.
Drawback 
You take a –1 item penalty to Acrobatics checks, 
Stealth checks, Thievery checks, Reffiex saves, and AC.
BLACK ADDER VENOM
 ITEM 
2 Price 5 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 15; 
Maximum 
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableInjuryPoison
362 Duration 
3 rounds; 
Stage 1 1d6 poison damage (1 round); 
Stage 2 1d8 poison damage (1 round); 
Stage 3 1d12 poison 
damage (1 round)
BLACK LOTUS EXTRACT
 ITEM 
19
Price 5,000 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 38; 
Onset 1 minute; 
Maximum Duration 
6 rounds; 
Stage 1 12d6 poison 
damage and drained 1 (1 round); 
Stage 2 14d6 poison damage 
and drained 1 (1 round); 
Stage 3 16d6 poison damage and 
drained 2 (1 round)
BLIGHTBURN RESIN
 ITEM 
11
Price 160 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 26; 
Onset 1 minute; Maximum Duration 
6 rounds; 
Stage 1 7d6 poison damage 
(1 round); 
Stage 2 8d6 poison damage (1 round); 
Stage 3 12d6 poison damage (1 round)
BOMBER'S EYE ELIXIR
 ITEM 
3 Price 8 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation 
For the next minute, when you throw alchemical bombs, you 
ignore the effects of screening (see page 314). 
BOTTLED LIGHTNING
 ITEM 
1 Price 3 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LBottled lightning is packed with volatile reagents 
that create a blast of electricity when they 
are exposed to air. Bottled lightning deals 1d6 
electricity damage and 1 electricity splash damage and causes the target to be fflat-footed to all creatures until the start of your 
next turn.
BRAVO'S BREW
 ITEM 
3 Price 7 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation 
This ffiask of foaming beer grants courage. For the 
next hour after drinking this elixir, you gain a +1 item bonus to 
Will saves and a +3 item bonus to Will saves against fear.
BRIMSTONE FUMES
 ITEM 
16
Price 1,200 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 33; 
Onset 1 round; 
Maximum Duration 
6 rounds; 
Stage 1 6d6 poison damage (1 round); 
Stage 2 7d6 poison damage and enfeebled 1 (1 round); 
Stage 3 8d6 poison damage and enfeebled 3 (1 round)
AlchemicalConsumableContactPoison
VirulentAlchemicalConsumableContactPoison
AlchemicalConsumableElixirAlchemicalBombConsumableElectricitySplashAlchemicalConsumableElixirMentalAlchemicalConsumableInhaledPoison
BULLHEADED MUTAGEN
 ITEM 
9 Price 90 gp Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset 1 minuteFor 10 minutes after the onset of this mutagen, you 
gain more control of your mind and can steel your will 
against mental assaults, but you seem standofish and ofi-putting.
benefit You gain a +3 item bonus to Will saves, Perception checks, 
Medicine checks, Nature checks, Religion checks, and Survival 
checks. This bonus increases to +4 against mental effects.
Drawback 
You take a –2 item penalty to Deception, Diplomacy, 
Intimidation, and Performance checks, and you lose 2 RP. 
BULLHEADED MUTAGEN, GREATER
 ITEM 
13
 Price 400 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset 1 minuteFor 1 hour after the onset of this mutagen, you gain 
more control of your mind and can steel your will 
against mental assaults, but your arrogance makes you seem 
standofish and ofi-putting.
benefit You gain a +4 item bonus to Will saves, Perception 
checks, Medicine checks, Nature checks, Religion checks, 
and Survival checks. This bonus increases to +5 against 
mental effects. Drawback 
You take a –2 item penalty to Deception, Diplomacy, 
Intimidation, and Performance checks, and you lose 2 RP. 
BULLHEADED MUTAGEN, LESSER
 ITEM 
5 Price 20 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset end of your next turn
For 1 minute after the onset of this mutagen, you 
gain more control of your mind and can steel your will against 
mental assaults, but your arrogance makes you seem standofish 
and ofi-putting.
benefit You gain a +2 item bonus to Will saves, Perception 
checks, Medicine checks, Nature checks, Religion checks, 
and Survival checks. This bonus increases to +3 against 
mental effects. Drawback 
You take a –1 item penalty to Deception, Diplomacy, 
Intimidation, and Performance checks, and you lose 1 RP. 
BULLHEADED MUTAGEN, TRUE
 ITEM 
17
Price 2,000 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset end of your 
next turn
For 1 hour after the onset of this mutagen, you 
gain more control of your mind and can steel your will against 
mental assaults, but your arrogance makes you seem standofish 
and ofi-putting.
benefit You gain a +5 item bonus to Will saves, Perception 
checks, Medicine checks, Nature checks, Religion checks, and 
Survival checks and resistance 15 against mental damage.
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
363 Drawback 
You take a –4 item penalty to Deception, Diplomacy, 
Intimidation, and Performance checks, and you lose 4 RP.
CAT'S EYE ELIXIR
 ITEM 
3 Price 7 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation 
For the next minute, you treat sensed creatures within 30 feet as 
if they were concealed, and concealed creatures within 30 feet 
as if they were seen. 
CHEETAH'S ELIXIR
 ITEM 
1 Price 2 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation 
For the next minute, you are accelerated 5.
CYTILLESH OIL
 ITEM 
3 Price 8 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 16; 
Maximum Duration 
4 rounds; 
Stage 1 1d8 poison damage (1 round); 
Stage 2 1d10 poison damage (1 round); 
Stage 3 2d8 poison damage (1 round)
COGNITIVE MUTAGEN
 ITEM 
9 Price 90 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset 1 minuteFor 10 minutes after the onset of this mutagen, 
your mind becomes clear and cognition ffiows 
freely, but physical matters seem ephemeral.
AlchemicalConsumableElixirAlchemicalConsumableElixirAlchemicalConsumableInjuryPoison
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
benefit You gain a +3 item bonus to Arcana, Crafting, 
Lore, Occultism, and Society checks and all checks to 
Recall Knowledge, regardless of the subject matter. You 
treat a critical failure on a Recall Knowledge check as a 
failure
 instead. Drawback
 You take a –2 item penalty to melee attack rolls 
and Athletics checks, you can carry 2 less Bulk than normal 
before becoming encumbered, and the maximum Bulk you 
can carry is 4 less. COGNITIVE MUTAGEN, GREATER
 ITEM 
13
Price 400 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset 1 minuteFor 1 minute after the onset of this mutagen, your 
mind becomes clear and cognition ffiows freely, but 
physical matters seem ephemeral.
benefit You gain a +4 item bonus to Arcana, Crafting, 
Lore, Occultism, and Society checks and all checks to 
Recall Knowledge. You treat a critical failure on a Recall 
Knowledge check as a failure instead.
Drawback
 You take a –3 item penalty to melee attack rolls 
and Athletics checks, you can carry 3 less Bulk than 
normal before becoming encumbered, and the maximum 
Bulk you can carry is 6 less.
COGNITIVE MUTAGEN, LESSER
 ITEM 
5 Price 20 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset end of your next turn
For 1 minute after the onset of this mutagen, your 
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
ANTIPLAGUE
BESTIAL MUTAGEN
GREATER BESTIAL 
MUTAGEN
BULLHEADED MUTAGEN
ALCHEMIST'S FIRE
GREATER BULLHEADED 
MUTAGEN
COGNITIVE 
 MUTAGEN
GREATER
 COGNITIVE 
 MUTAGEN
NIGHTMARE 
 VAPOR
ACID FLASK
364mind becomes clear and cognition ffiows freely, but physical 
matters seem ephemeral.
benefit You gain a +2 item bonus to Arcana, Crafting, 
Lore, Occultism, and Society checks and all checks to 
Recall Knowledge. You treat a critical failure on a Recall 
Knowledge check as a failure instead.
Drawback
 You take a –1 item penalty to melee attack rolls 
and Athletics checks, you can carry 1 less Bulk than normal 
before becoming encumbered,and the maximum Bulk you 
can carry is 2 less. 
COGNITIVE MUTAGEN, TRUE
 ITEM 
17
Price 2,000 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset end of your next turn
For 1 hour after the onset of this mutagen, your 
mind becomes clear and cognition ffiows freely, but physical 
matters seem ephemeral.
Benefit You gain a +5 item bonus to Arcana, Crafting, 
Lore, Occultism, and Society checks and all checks to 
Recall Knowledge. You treat a critical failure on a Recall 
Knowledge check as a failure instead.
Drawback
 You take a –4 item penalty to melee attack rolls 
and Athletics checks, you can carry 4 less Bulk than 
normal before becoming encumbered, and the maximum 
Bulk you can carry is 8 less.
COMPREHENSION ELIXIR
 ITEM 
2 Price 4 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation 
For the next minute after drinking this elixir, you can 
understand the words that you are reading so long as they are 
written in a common language. This elixir doesn't automatically 
allow you to understand codes or extremely esoteric passages.
DARKVISION
 ELIXIR
 ITEM 
1+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation 
Upon your drinking of this elixir, your sight 
becomes sharper in darkness. This elixir has three types: 
standard, greater, and true. Upon drinking the standard elixir, 
you gain darkvision for 10 minutes. The greater version grants 
you darkvision for 1 hour, and the true elixir grants darkvision 
for 8 hours. Type
 standard; 
Level
 1; Price 2 gpType
 greater; 
Level
 3; Price 6 gpType
 true; Level
 6; Price 24 gp
DEATHCAP POWDER
 ITEM 
13
Price 360 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 30; 
Onset 10 minutes; Maximum Duration 
6 minutes; Stage 1 10d6 poison damage AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMentalAlchemicalConsumableElixirAlchemicalConsumableIngestedPoison
(1 minute); Stage 2 13d6 poison damage and sick 2 (1 minute); Stage 3 16d6 poison damage and sick 3 (1 minute)DRAGON BILE
 ITEM 
15
Price 720 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 32; 
Onset 1 minute; Maximum Duration 
6 rounds; 
Stage 1
 4d6 poison damage and sick 2 (1 round); 
Stage 2 5d6 poison damage and sick 3 (1 round); 
Stage 3 6d6 poison damage and sick 4 (1 round)
EAGLEflEYE ELIXIR
 ITEM 
1 Price 2 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation 
For the next hour after drinking this elixir, you gain a +1 item 
bonus to Perception checks. This item bonus increases to +2 for 
Perception checks to find secret doors and traps. 
ELIXIR OF LIFE
 ITEM 
8 Price 60 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation 
Upon drinking this elixir, you regain 7d6 Hit Points and can 
attempt a new save against any one toxin of 8th level or lower 
currently aflicting you. If you succeed, the toxin is neutralized.
ELIXIR OF LIFE, GREATER
 ITEM 
12
Price 250 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation 
Upon drinking this elixir, you regain 10d6 Hit Points and can end 
a toxin aflicting you as long as it is not higher than 12th level.
ELIXIR OF LIFE, LESSER
 ITEM 
4 Price 12 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation 
Upon drinking this elixir, you regain 3d6 Hit Points. If you are at 
maximum Hit Points when you drink this elixir, you instead gain a 
+2 item bonus to Fortitude saving throws against toxins for 1 hour. 
ELIXIR OF LIFE, MINOR
 ITEM 
1 Price 3 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation 
Upon drinking this elixir, you regain 1d6 Hit Points. If you are 
at maximum Hit Points when you drink this elixir, you instead 
gain a +1 item bonus to Fortitude saving throws for 1 hour 
against toxins, including diseases, poisons, and venoms. 
ELIXIR OF LIFE, TRUE
 ITEM 
16
Price 1,200 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation 
AlchemicalConsumableContactPoison
AlchemicalConsumableElixirAlchemicalConsumableElixirAlchemicalConsumableElixirAlchemicalConsumableElixirAlchemicalConsumableElixirAlchemicalConsumableElixir365 Upon drinking this elixir, you regain 14d6 Hit Points, and you 
end all toxins currently afflicting you as long as those toxins 
are not higher than 16th level. 
ELIXIR OF REJUVENATION
 ITEM 
20
 Price —Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation 
When you drink this elixir, you're restored to your maximum 
Hit Points and all toxins of 20th level or lower afflicting you 
are removed, but you lose all remaining RP.
You can instead administer this elixir to a creature that has been 
dead for a week or less; in this case, the Operate Activation does 
not require the expenditure of a Resonance Point. When you do, 
that creature is instantly brought back to life with 1 HP and 0 RP.
Either way, the target is treated as if it had failed a check 
to overspend RP.
Craft Requirements
 philosopher's stone; true elixir of life; 
you must be legendary in Crafting and have the Alchemical 
Crafting feat
GIANT CENTIPEDE VENOM
 ITEM 
1 Price 3 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 14; 
Maximum Duration 
6 rounds; 
Stage 1 1d4 poison damage (1 round); 
Stage 2 1d6 poison damage and fflat-footed (1 round); 
Stage 3 1d8 poison damage, fflat-footed, and sluggish 1 (1 round)
GIANT SCORPION VENOM
 ITEM 
6 Price 30 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 19; 
Maximum 
Duration 
6 rounds; 
Stage 1 1d8 poison damage and enfeebled 1 
(1 round); 
Stage 2 2d8 poison damage and enfeebled 1 (1 round); 
Stage 3 2d8 poison damage and enfeebled 2 (1 round)
GIANT WASP VENOM
 ITEM 
7 Price 45 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 20; 
Maximum 
Duration 
6 rounds; 
Stage 1 1d8 poison damage and sluggish 1 
(1 round); 
Stage 2 1d12 poison damage and sluggish 2 (1 round); 
Stage 3 2d8 poison and sluggish 2 (1 round)
GRAVEROOT
 ITEM 
3 Price 8 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 16; 
Maximum Duration 
4 rounds; 
Stage 1 1d8 poison damage (1 round); 
Stage 2 1d10 poison damage and stupefled 1 (1 round); 
Stage 3 1d12 poison damage and stupefled 2 (1 round)
AlchemicalConsumableElixirAlchemicalConsumableInjuryPoison
AlchemicalConsumableInjuryPoison
AlchemicalConsumableInjuryPoison
AlchemicalConsumableInjuryPoison
HEMLOCK
 ITEM 
17
Price 1,800 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 35; 
Onset 30 minutes; Maximum Duration 
60 minutes; Stage 1 13d6 poison damage and enfeebled 2 (10 minutes); Stage 2 16d6 poison damage and enfeebled 3 (10 minutes); Stage 3 20d6 poison damage and enfeebled 4 (10 minutes). HUNTING SPIDER VENOM
 ITEM 
5 Price 20 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 18; 
Maximum 
Duration 
6 rounds; 
Stage 1 1d8 poison damage and fflat-footed 
(1 round); 
Stage 2 1d8 poison damage, fflat-footed, and sluggish 
1 (1 round); 
Stage 3 1d10 poison damage, fflat-footed, and 
sluggish 2 (1 round)
INFILTRATOR'S ELIXIR
 ITEM 
2 Price 4 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset 1 minuteAfter the onset of this elixir, you take the shape 
of a humanoid creature of your size (or another creature of 
your type, if you aren't a humanoid, at the GM's discretion), but 
different enough so you might be unrecognizable. The creator of 
the elixir decides the sex, eye color, skin tone, and hair color that 
you transform into when crafting the elixir, but it cannot change 
your form into a speciflc person. After the form takes hold, you 
retain it for the next 10 minutes. 
Drinking this elixir counts as setting up a disguise for the Impersonate action of Deception. You gain a +4 item bonus to 
your Deception DC to avoid others seeing through your disguise. 
INSANITY MIST
 ITEM 
15
Price 800 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 31; 
Onset 1 round; 
Maximum Duration 
6 rounds; 
Stage 1STupefled 2 (1 round); 
Stage 2 confused and stupefled 3 (1 round); 
Stage 3 confused 
and stupefled 4 (1 round)
JUGGERNAUT MUTAGEN
 ITEM 
9 Price 90 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset 1 minuteFor 10 minutes after the onset of this mutagen, your 
body becomes thick and sturdy and you exhibit a 
healthy glow, though you tend to be ponderous and unobservant.
benefit You gain a +3 item bonus to Fortitude saves and 20 
temporary Hit Points. Whenever you are at maximum Hit 
Points for at least 1 full minute, you regain the full 20 
temporary Hit Points.
AlchemicalConsumableIngestedPoison
AlchemicalConsumableInjuryPoison
AlchemicalConsumableElixirPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableInhaledPoison
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
366 Drawback 
You take a –2 item penalty to Will saves, Perception 
checks, Medicine checks, Nature checks, Religion checks, 
and Survival checks.
JUGGERNAUT MUTAGEN, GREATER
 ITEM 
13
Price 400 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset 1 minuteFor 1 hour after the onset of this mutagen, your 
body becomes thick and sturdy and you exhibit a 
healthy glow, though you tend to be ponderous and
 unobservant.
benefit You gain a +4 item bonus to Fortitude saves and 40 
temporary Hit Points. Whenever you are at maximum Hit 
Points for at least 1 full minute, you regain the full 40 
temporary Hit Points.
Drawback 
You take a –2 item penalty to Will saves, 
Perception checks, Medicine checks, Nature checks, 
Religion checks, and Survival checks.
JUGGERNAUT MUTAGEN, TRUE
 ITEM 
17
Price 2,000 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset end of your next turn
For 1 hour after the onset of this mutagen, your 
body becomes thick and sturdy and you exhibit a healthy glow, 
though you tend to be ponderous and unobservant.
benefit You gain a +5 item bonus to Fortitude saves and 50 
temporary Hit Points. Whenever you are at maximum Hit 
Points for at least 1 full minute, you regain the full 50 
temporary Hit Points.
Drawback 
You take a –3 item penalty to Will saves, Perception 
checks, Medicine checks, Nature checks, Religion checks, 
and Survival checks.
JUGGERNAUT MUTAGEN, LESSER
 ITEM 
5 Price 20 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset end of your next turn
For 1 minute after the onset of this mutagen, your 
body becomes thick and sturdy and you exhibit a healthy glow, 
though you tend to be ponderous and unobservant. 
benefit You gain a +2 item bonus to Fortitude saves and 10 
temporary Hit Points. 
Drawback 
You take a –1 item penalty to Will saves, Perception 
checks, Medicine checks, Nature checks, Religion checks, 
and Survival checks.
KING'S SLEEP
 ITEM 
18
Price 3,000 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
King's sleep is an insidious long-term poison 
that might seem like a disease or even a death 
from natural causes if used on a venerable target. The drained 
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableIngestedPoison
Virulentcondition from king's sleep stacks with each failed save and 
can't be removed until the target is cured of the poison.
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 36; 
Onset 1 day; 
Stage 1
 drained 1 (1 day); 
Stage 2 drained 1 (1 day); 
Stage 3 drained 2 (1 day)
LEAPER'S ELIXIR
 ITEM 
1 Price 2 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation 
For 1 minute after drinking this elixir, you can attempt High 
Jumps and Long Jumps with a single Leap action, rather than as a 
two-action activity requiring a Stride and a Leap. 
LICH DUST
 ITEM 
9 Price 80 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 23; 
Onset 10 minutes; Maximum Duration 
6 minutes; Stage 1 fatigued (1 minute); 
Stage 2 4d6 poison damage and fatigued (1 minute); 
Stage 3 4d6 poison damage, fatigued, and paralyzed (1 minute)
LIQUID ICE
 ITEM 
1 Price 3 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LThe liquid reagents in this vial create a freezing 
efiect when exposed to air. Liquid ice deals 
1d4 cold damage, deals 1 cold splash damage, 
and causes the target to be hampered 10 until the end of its 
next
 turn. MALYASS ROOT PASTE
 ITEM 
7 Price 40 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 21; 
Onset 1 minute; 
Maximum Duration 
6 minutes; Stage 1 hampered 10 and 
sluggish 1 (1 minute); Stage 2 hampered 20 and sluggish 2 
(1 minute); Stage 3 fflat-footed, hampered 30, and sluggish 3 
(1 minute)MISTFORM ELIXIR
 ITEM 
3 Price 8 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation 
Upon drinking this elixir, your form appears blurry, 
making you concealed for 1 minute.
NETTLEWEED RESIDUE
 ITEM 
8 Price 55 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 22; 
Onset 1 minute; Maximum Duration 
6 minutes; Stage 1 6d6 poison damage (1 minute); Stage 2 8d6 poison damage (1 minute); Stage 3 10d6 poison damage (1 minute)AlchemicalConsumableElixirAlchemicalConsumableIngestedPoison
AlchemicalBombColdConsumableSplashAlchemicalConsumableContactPoison
AlchemicalConsumableElixirIllusionVisualAlchemicalConsumableContactPoison
367 NIGHTMARE VAPOR
 ITEM 
16
Price 1,200 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 33; 
Onset 1 round; 
Maximum Duration 
6 rounds; 
Stage 1 confused (1 round); 
Stage 2 confused and fflat-footed (1 round); 
Stage 3 confused, fflat-footed, 
and stupefled 2 (1 round)
PHILOSOPHER'S STONE
 ITEM 
20
Price —Method of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk 2 Activation 
 Operate Activation or 1 or more days; see below
An alchemist with the Craft Philosopher's Stone feat can create 
a philosopher's stone once per month using the advanced 
alchemy class feature. This is the only way to create a 
philosopher's stone. 
At a glance, a philosopher's stone appears to be an ordinary, 
sooty piece of natural rock. Breaking the rock open with a 
Break Open action (DC 25) reveals a cavity at the stone's heart. 
The cavity is lined with a rare type of quicksilver that can 
transmute base metals into precious metals or create an elixir of 
rejuvenation (see page 365). 
To use the stone's quicksilver, you must be Legendary in 
Crafting and you must have the Alchemical Crafting feat. You 
can then apply the stone's quicksilver for one of two effects:

Ł You can apply the stone's quicksilver to an infused 
true elixir of life using an Operate Activation action 
to create an infused elixir of rejuvenation. This is 
instantaneous and does not require any crafting time or 
additional materials. 

Ł You can spend up to a month of downtime applying the 
quicksilver either to iron to create silver or to lead to create 
gold. Treat this as a 20th-level task for Crafting as a trade, 
except you don't need any setup, you create 5,000 sp or 
500 gp per day on a success, and you create 7,500 sp or 750 
gp per day on a critical success.
PURPLE WORM VENOM
 ITEM 
13
Price 400 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 29; 
Maximum Duration 
6 rounds; 
Stage 1 3d6 poison damage and enfeebled 2 (1 round); 
Stage 2 4d6 poison damage and enfeebled 2 (1 round); 
Stage 3 6d6 poison and enfeebled 2 (1 round)
QUICKSILVER MUTAGEN
 ITEM 
9 Price 90 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset 1 minuteFor 10 minutes after the onset of this mutagen, 
your features become thin and angular and 
you become swifter and nimbler, but your body also 
becomes fragile. benefit You gain a +3 item bonus to Acrobatics checks, Stealth 
AlchemicalConsumableInhaledPoison
AlchemicalConsumableAlchemicalConsumableInjuryPoison
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
checks, Thievery checks, Reffiex saves, and ranged attack 
rolls, and you become accelerated 15.
Drawback
 You take a –2 item penalty to Fortitude saves and 
take 20 damage. You can't recover Hit Points lost in this 
way by any means while the mutagen lasts.
QUICKSILVER MUTAGEN, GREATER
 ITEM 
13
Price 400 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset 1 minuteFor 1 hour after the onset of this mutagen, your 
features become thin and angular and you become 
swifter and nimbler, but your body also becomes fragile.
benefit You gain a +4 item bonus to Acrobatics checks, Stealth 
checks, Thievery checks, Reffiex saves, and ranged attack 
rolls, and you become accelerated 20.
Drawback 
You take a –2 item penalty to Fortitude saves and 
take 40 damage. You can't recover Hit Points lost in this 
way by any means while the mutagen lasts.
QUICKSILVER MUTAGEN, LESSER
 ITEM 
5 Price 20 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset end of your next turn
For 1 minute after the onset of this mutagen, your 
features become thin and angular and you become swifter and 
nimbler, but your body also becomes fragile.
benefit You gain a +2 item bonus to Acrobatics checks, Stealth 
checks, Thievery checks, Reffiex saves, and ranged attack 
rolls, and you become accelerated 10.
Drawback 
You take a –1 item penalty to Fortitude saves and 
take 10 damage. You can't recover Hit Points lost in this 
way by any means while the mutagen lasts.
QUICKSILVER MUTAGEN, TRUE
 ITEM 
17
Price 2,000 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset end of your next turn
For 1 hour after the onset of this mutagen, your 
features become thin and angular and you become swifter and 
nimbler, but your body also becomes fragile.
benefit You gain a +5 item bonus to Acrobatics checks, Stealth 
checks, Thievery checks, Reffiex saves, and ranged attack 
rolls, and you become accelerated 25.
Drawback 
You take a –3 item penalty to Fortitude saves and 
take 50 damage. You can't recover Hit Points lost in this 
way by any means while the mutagen lasts.
SALAMANDER ELIXIR
 ITEM 
2 Price 4 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset 1 minuteFor 24 hours after the onset of this elixir, you are protected from 
the effects of severe heat (see page 341). 
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableElixir368 SEA TOUCH ELIXIR
 ITEM 
4 Price 10 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset 1 minuteAfter the onset of this elixir, the spaces between 
your flngers and toes become webbed, granting you a swim 
Speed of 20 feet for the next 10 minutes.
SHADOW ESSENCE
 ITEM 
10
Price 125 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation, no cost
The enfeebled condition from shadow essence 
lasts for 24 hours.
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 24; 
Maximum Duration 
6 rounds; 
Stage 1 2d6 negative damage and 2d6 poison damage (1
 round); 
Stage 2 2d6 negative damage, 2d6 poison damage, and 
enfeebled 1 (1 round); 
Stage 3 2d6 negative damage, 2d6 poison 
damage, and enfeebled 2 (1 round)
SILVERSHEEN
 ITEM 
1 Price 2 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
You can slather this silvery paste onto a melee or thrown 
weapon or a bundle of ammunition. For the next hour, any 
physical damage the weapon or ammunition deals is silver. 
Applying silversheen to a weapon or ammunition temporarily 
replaces any damage type from its special materials (such 
as cold iron). One vial coats one melee weapon, one thrown 
weapon, or 10 pieces of ammunition.
SILVERTONGUE MUTAGEN
 ITEM 
9 Price 90 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset 1 minuteFor 10 minutes after the onset of this mutagen, 
your features become fair and your voice 
becomes musical and commanding, though facts and flgures 
become hazy for you and your reason takes a back seat to 
your
 emotions. 
benefit You gain a +3 item bonus to Deception, Diplomacy, 
Intimidation, and Performance checks, and you treat all 
critical failures with those skills as failures.
Drawback 
You take a –2 item penalty to Arcana, Crafting, 
Lore, Occultism, and Society checks, as well as all skill 
checks in which you are trained or expert other than your 
signature skills. You treat all failures on checks made to 
Recall Knowledge as critical failures.
SILVERTONGUE MUTAGEN, GREATER
 ITEM 
13
Price 400 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset 1 minuteFor 1 hour after the onset of this mutagen, your 
features become fair and your voice musical and 
AlchemicalConsumableElixirPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableInjuryNegative
Poison
AlchemicalConsumableAlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
commanding, though facts and flgures become hazy and your 
reason takes a backseat to your emotions.
benefit You gain a +4 item bonus to Deception, Diplomacy, 
Intimidation, and Performance checks, and you treat all 
critical failures with those skills as failures.
Drawback 
You take a –3 item penalty to Arcana, Crafting, 
Lore, Occultism, and Society checks, as well as all skill 
checks in which you are trained or expert other than your 
signature skills. You treat all failures on checks made to 
Recall Knowledge as critical failures.
SILVERTONGUE MUTAGEN, LESSER
 ITEM 
5 Price 20 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation; 
Onset end of your next turn
For 1 minute after the onset of this mutagen, your 
features become fair and your voice musical and commanding, 
though facts and flgures become hazy and your reason takes a 
backseat to your emotions.
benefit You gain a +2 item bonus to Deception, Diplomacy, 
Intimidation, and Performance checks, and you treat all 
critical failures with those skills as failures. 
Drawback 
You take a –1 item penalty to Arcana, Crafting, Lore, 
Occultism, and Society checks, as well as all skill checks in 
which you are trained or expert other than your signature 
skills. You treat all failures on checks made to Recall 
Knowledge as critical failures.
SILVERTONGUE MUTAGEN, TRUE
 ITEM 
17
Price 2,000 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset end of your next turn
For 1 hour after the onset of this mutagen, your 
features become fair and your voice musical and commanding, 
though facts and flgures become hazy and your reason takes a 
backseat to your emotions.
Benefit You gain a +5 item bonus to Deception, Diplomacy, 
Intimidation, and Performance checks, and you treat all 
critical failures with those skills as failures.
Drawback 
You take a –4 item penalty to Arcana, Crafting, 
Lore, Occultism, and Society checks, all checks made to 
Recall Knowledge, as well as all skill checks in which you 
are trained or expert other than your signature skills. You 
treat all failures on checks made to Recall Knowledge as 
critical failures.
SLEEP POISON
 ITEM 
2 Price 5 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 13; 
Maximum Duration 
4 hours; Stage 1 slowed 1 (1 round); 
Stage 2 asleep with no Perception check to wake up (1 round) 
Stage 3 asleep with no Perception check to wake up (1d4 hours)
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableElixirMutagenPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableInjuryPoison
369 SLUMBER WINE
 ITEM 
12
Price 250 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
Characters asleep from slumber wine can't wake 
up by any means while the poison lasts, don't need to eat or drink 
while asleep in this way, and appear to be recently dead unless 
an examiner succeeds at a DC 33 Medicine check.
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 26; 
Onset 1 hour; Maximum Duration 
7 days; 
Stage 1 asleep (1 day); 
Stage 2 asleep (2 days); 
Stage 3 asleep (3 days).
SMOKESTICK ITEM 
1 Price 2 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
With a sharp twist of this item, you instantly create a screen of 
thick, opaque smoke in a 5-foot-radius burst centered on one 
corner of your space. All creatures within that area are concealed 
(see page 302). The smoke lasts for 1 minute or until dispersed by 
a strong wind.
SPIDER ROOT
 ITEM 
9 Price 80 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 23; 
Onset 1 minute; 
Maximum Duration 
6 minutes; Stage 1 5d6 poison damage 
and sluggish 1 (1 minute); Stage 2 6d6 poison damage and 
sluggish 2 (1 minute); Stage 3
 7d6 poison damage and 
sluggish 3 (1 minute)STONE FIST ELIXIR
 ITEM 
2 Price 5 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset 1 minuteAfter the onset of this elixir, your flsts become as 
hard as stone. For 1 hour, your flsts deal 1d6 bludgeoning damage. 
SUNROD ITEM 
1 Price 2 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
This 1-foot-long, gold-tipped rod glows after it's struck on a hard 
surface. It sheds normal light in a 20-foot radius for 6 hours. TANGLEFOOT BAG
  ITEM 
1 Price 3 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LA tanglefoot bag is fllled with sticky substances. When you hit a creature with a tanglefoot bag, that creature 
becomes entangled for 1 minute. Tanglefoot bags are not 
efiective when used on a creature that is in water. The target 
or a creature adjacent to the target can end the entangled 
condition by spending 3 Interact actions. These actions need not 
be consecutive.
AlchemicalConsumableIngestedPoison
AlchemicalConsumableAlchemicalConsumableContactPoison
AlchemicalConsumableElixirPolymorph
AlchemicalConsumableLightAlchemicalBombConsumableTEARS OF DEATH
 ITEM 
20
Price 9,000 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 40; 
Onset 1 minute; Maximum Duration 
10 minutes; Stage 1
 15d6 poison damage and paralyzed (1 round); 
Stage 2 20d6 poison 
damage and paralyzed (1 minute); 
Stage 3 25d6 poison damage and paralyzed (1 minute)
THUNDERSTONE
 ITEM 
1 Price 3 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LWhen this stone hits a hard surface or creature, it 
explodes with a deafening bang. A thunderstone 
deals 1d4 sonic damage and 1 sonic splash damage, 
and each creature within 10 feet of the space in which the stone 
exploded must succeed at a DC 15 Fortitude saving throw or be 
deafened until the end of its next turn. 
TINDERTWIG
 ITEM 
1 Price 2 spMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk —Activation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
An alchemical substance on one end of this tiny wooden stick 
ignites when struck against a rough surface. Creating a fflame 
with a tindertwig is much faster than creating a fflame with a 
ffiint and steel; as part of the activate action, you can touch the 
tindertwig to a ffiammable object to set it on fire. 
WINTER WOLF ELIXIR
 ITEM 
2 Price 4 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation; 
Onset 1 minuteFor 24 hours after the onset of this elixir, you become protected 
from the effects of severe cold (see page 341). 
WOLFSBANE
 ITEM 
10
Price 110 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation 
 Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 25; 
Onset 10 minutes; Maximum Duration 
6 minutes; Stage 1
 9d6 poison damage (1 minute); Stage 2 12d6 poison damage (1 minute); Stage 3 15d6 poison damage (1 minute)Additional Efiect
 If you survive the damage from stage 3 
of wolfsbane and you are aflicted with lycanthropy, you're 
immediately cured.
WYVERN POISON
 ITEM 
8 Price 60 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation, no cost
Saving Throw 
Fortitude DC 21; 
Maximum Duration 
6 rounds; 
Stage 1 4d6 poison damage (1 round); 
Stage 2 5d6 poison damage (1 round); 
Stage 3 6d6 poison damage (1 round)
AlchemicalConsumableContactPoison
VirulentAlchemicalBombConsumableSonicSplashAlchemicalConsumableFire
AlchemicalConsumableElixirAlchemicalConsumableIngestedPoison
AlchemicalConsumableInjuryPoison
370 Some magic weapons and armor gain their enhancements 
from potent eldritch runes etched into them. These runes 
allow for in-depth customization of items. Runes must be physically engraved on items through 
a special process to convey their benefits. They take two 
forms: potency runes and property runes. A potency 
rune enhances the effectiveness of an armor or weapon, 
increasing its overall protective or destructive potency. 
Property runes, by contrast, grant more varied effects, 
typically powers that are constant while the armor is 
worn or take effect each time the weapon is used. 
A suit of armor or weapon of expert quality or better 
can be etched with runes. The quality of the armor or 
weapon determines the maximum power of its potency 
rune and the number of property runes it can have. QualityMax Potency
Max Properties
Standard
NoneNoneExpert+21 Master+42 Legendary
+53 If you want to add a potency or property rune to an 
item of insufficient quality, you must first increase the 
quality of the item, as described on page 190.An item with runes etched on it is typically referred to 
by the value of its potency rune, followed by its quality 
(if that quality is higher than the minimum required for 
its potency), its properties, and finally its item type; for 
example, a +1 longsword, +4 legendary fire-resistant 
chain mail, or an expert flaming kukri. Magical armor and weapons have the same Bulk and 
general characteristics as the nonmagical version of the 
same quality unless noted otherwise. The level of an item with runes etched on it is equal to 
the highest level among the base item and all runes etched 
on it; therefore, a +1 mace (4th level) with a disrupting rune (5th level) would be a 5th-level item. THE ETCHING PROCESS
Etching a rune on an item follows the same process as 
using the Craft activity to make an item. You must have 
the formula for the rune, and the item you're adding the 
rune to must be in your possession throughout the etching 
process. The rune has no effect until you complete the 
Craft activity. You can etch one rune at a time, and you 
can add or replace runes at a later time. RUN
E FORM
UL
AS
Like items, runes have formulas. The rune for each potency 
and property has a discrete formula. Its Price is the same 
as an item formula of its level and can be attained in the 
same way as an item formula (see page 188).TRA
NSFERR
IN
G RUN
ES
You can transfer runes between one item and another by 
using the Craft activity. The DC of the Crafting check is 
determined by the item level of the rune being transferred (or the higher of the two, in the case of a swap), and the Price of the transfer is 10% of that rune's Price. The base 
downtime to complete the transfer is 1 day, and you can 
continue to work over additional days to get a discount, as usual with Craft. Runes being transferred become 
inert as soon as you begin the activity, and their benefits 
resume only upon completion of the activity.
When you transfer runes, you can move one rune 
from one item to another or swap runes of the same type 
(potency or property) between two different items. For 
example, you could transfer a +2 weapon potency rune 
from a +2 greatsword to an expert-quality longsword, 
resulting in a +2 longsword and a nonmagical expert-quality greatsword. You could swap the 
weapon potency runes from a 
+1 longsword
 and a 
+2 greatsword, resulting in a +2 longsword and a +1 greatsword. However, you couldn't swap a 
+1 weapon potency rune from one weapon with a flaming property rune from 
another weapon, as the two runes aren't of the same 
type. You can also transfer runes to or from 
runestones (see page 406).If an item can have two or more property runes, you choose which slot to fill when transferring a rune. For example, a master-quality item can hold two property 
runes. If you transferred a flaming rune from a +2 flaming rapier to a +3 frost warhammer, you would decide whether you wanted to end up with a 
+2 rapier
 and a 
+3 flaming frost warhammer, or a +2 frost rapier and a +3 flaming warhammer. If you attempt to transfer a rune to an item that can't 
accept it, such as transferring a +3 weapon potency rune to an expert-quality weapon, you get an automatic critical failure on your Crafting check. POTENCY RUNES
Potency runes are the most common runes an adventurer might etch or have etched on their weapons and armor. 
A suit of armor or a weapon can have only one potency rune, though etching a stronger potency rune can upgrade an existing rune to the more powerful version. A potency rune etched into armor increases its protective power by 
RUNES
SPECIFIC ARMOR AND WEAPONSUnlike armor and weapons enhanced through the rune-etching 
process, speciflc armor and weapons (such as 
ghoul hide or a holy avenger
) are themed to a speciflc purpose and can work quite 
differently from any other item of their type. Speciflc magic armor 
and weapons can't gain property runes. However, you can add 
or improve their potency runes, and you can also improve their 
quality (as described on page 190).371magically strengthening the armor's material and adding 
subtle wards against attacks. A potency rune etched on a weapon increases both the accuracy and the amount of damage the weapon can deal. ARMOR POTENCY
 RUNE 
3+
Method of Use etched, armorYou can etch an 
armor potency rune on a suit of armor of the quality listed under the individual entry for the type 
of rune. Runes of +2 armor potency or stronger require the armor 
to already have the listed weaker rune, and etching the new rune 
increases the existing potency rune to the new value. 
An armor potency rune grants two defensive benefits. First, it 
increases the armor's item bonuses to AC and TAC by the value 
of the potency rune. For instance, a master-quality breastplate 
with a +3 armor potency rune would grant an AC bonus of +7 and 
a TAC bonus +5, instead of +4 and +2.
Second, the rune adds an item bonus equal to the potency rune's value to the wearer's saving throws. So the wearer of the 
+3 breastplate
 described above would also gain a +3 item bonus 
to Fortitude, Reffiex, and Will saves.
Type 
+1 light or medium armor potency; Level
 3; Price 25 gpThis rune can be etched only on light or medium armor of expert or better quality.
Type 
+1 heavy armor potency; Level
 4; Price 50 gpThis rune can be etched only on heavy armor of expert or 
better quality.
Type 
+2 armor potency; Level
 7; Price 300 gpThis rune can be etched only on armor of expert or better 
quality that already has a 
+1 armor potency rune. It increases the 
armor's potency rune to +2.
Type 
+3 armor potency; Level
 11; Price 730 gpThis rune can be etched only on armor of master or better quality that already has a 
+2 armor potency rune. It increases the 
armor's potency rune to +3.
Type 
+4 armor potency; Level
 15; Price 5,100 gp
This rune can be etched only on armor of master or better quality that already has a 
+3 armor potency rune. It increases the 
armor's potency rune to +4.
Type 
+5 armor potency; Level
 19; Price 27,360 gp
This rune can be etched only on armor of legendary quality 
that already has a 
+4 armor potency rune. It increases the armor's 
potency rune to +5.Abjuration
MagicalWEAPON POTENCY
 RUNE 
4+
Method of Use etched, weapon
You can etch a 
weapon potency
 rune on a weapon 
of the quality listed under the individual entry for the type of rune. Runes of +2 weapon potency
 or stronger require the 
weapon to already have the listed weaker rune, and etching the 
new rune increases the existing potency rune to the new value. 
A weapon potency
 rune grants two ofiensive benefits. The 
weapon's wielder gains an item bonus to attack rolls with the 
weapon equal to the potency value. For instance, an expert 
dagger with a +2 weapon potency
 rune would grant a +2 item 
bonus to attack rolls with the dagger.
Second, on a successful attack roll, the weapon deals an 
additional number of weapon damage dice equal to the potency 
value. For example, a hit with the 
+2 dagger described above 
would deal 3d4 damage instead of 1d4 damage.
Type 
+1 weapon potency; Level
 4; Price 65 gpThis rune can be etched only on a weapon of expert or 
better quality.
Type 
+2 weapon potency; Level
 8; Price 400 gpThis rune can be etched only on a weapon of expert or better 
quality that already has a 
+1 weapon potency
 rune. It increases 
the weapon's potency rune to +2.
Type 
+3 weapon potency; Level
 12; Price 1,175 gp
This rune can be etched only on a weapon of master or better 
quality that already has a 
+2 weapon potency 
rune. It increases 
the weapon's potency rune to +3.
Type 
+4 weapon potency; Level
 16; Price 8,000 gpThis rune can be etched only on a weapon of master or better 
quality that already has a 
+3 weapon potency 
rune. It increases 
the weapon's potency rune to +4.
Type 
+5 weapon potency; Level
 20; Price 53,860 gpThis rune can be etched only on a weapon of legendary quality 
that already has a 
+4 weapon potency 
rune. It increases the 
weapon's potency rune to +5.
PROPERTY RUNES
Property runes add special abilities to armor or a weapon 
in addition to any potency rune the item has. If a suit of 
armor or a weapon has multiple runes of the same type, 
only the highest-level rune applies. For instance, a weapon 
with a 
standard corrosive rune and a 
greater corrosive 
rune applies only the greater corrosive rune's effects.
While most properties are constant abilities, some have special abilities that must be activated. These follow the 
rules for activating magic items on page 376.ANARCHIC RUNE 
11
Price 1,400 gp
Method of Use etched, weapon without an 
axiomatic runeA weapon with this rune deals 1d6 additional chaotic damage 
against lawful targets. If you are lawful, you are enfeebled 2 
while carrying or wielding this weapon. 
When you critically succeed at an attack roll with this weapon 
against a lawful creature, add one extra weapon damage die 
Evocation
MagicalChaoticEvocation
MagicalCHECK PENALTY
In addition to the magical bonuses to AC, TAC, and saving throws, 
magic armor has suficient quality to lower its check penalty. This 
information appears in the rules for item quality on page 190 and 
is repeated here for convenience.
QualityCheck Penalty Reduction
Expert1 Master2 Legendary
3372(after doubling for the critical hit), and all your weapon damage 
dice are treated as the maximum result on an even roll and 
treated as a 1 on an odd roll. For example, if your attack with a 
+1 anarchic greatsword
 is a critical hit and you rolled a 2, 8, 9, 
3, and 6, the 2, 8, and 6 would each be treated as a 10, and the 
9 and 3 would each be treated as a
 1, for a total of 32 damage. Craft Requirements
 You must be chaotic.
ANTIMAGIC
 RUNE 
14
Price 4,400 gp
Method of Use etched, armorActivation
  Command Activation; 
Trigger
 Someone casts a 
spell that targets you or includes you in its area.
Armor with this rune displaces spell energy, granting you a 
+1 conditional bonus to saving throws against magical effects. 
When activated, the armor attempts to dispel the triggering 
spell with the efiect of a 6th-level 
dispel magic spell and a spell 
roll of +20.
Craft Requirements
 You must supply a casting of
 dispel magic. AXIOMATIC
 RUNE 
11
Price 1,400 gp
Method of Use etched, weapon without an 
anarchic
 runeA weapon with this rune deals 1d6 additional lawful damage 
Abjuration
MagicalEvocation
Lawful
Magicalagainst chaotic targets. When you critically succeed at an 
attack roll with this weapon against a chaotic creature, instead 
of rolling, count each weapon damage die as average damage 
rounded up (3 for d4, 4 for d6, 5 for d8, 6 for d10, 7 for d12).
If you are chaotic, you become enfeebled 2 while carrying 
or wielding this weapon. 
Craft Requirements
 You must be lawful.
CORROSIVE RUNE 
9+Method of Use etched, weapon
The deadly surfaces of this weapon sizzle with 
acid. When your attack roll is a hit or a critical 
hit, add 1d6 acid damage to the damage dealt. In addition, on a critical hit, the target's armor (if any) becomes dented; if the 
target has a shield raised, the shield becomes dented instead. Type
 standard; 
Level
 9; Price 700 gpType
 greater; 
Level
 14; Price 4,500 gpThe acid damage dealt by this weapon ignores the target's acid 
resistance, and on a critical hit, the target's armor or shield is 
broken instead of dented.
DANCING
 RUNE 
14
Price 4,500 gpMethod of Use etched, melee weapon
Activation 
 Command Activation,
 Operate Activation
Acid
Conjuration
MagicalEvocation
MagicalUPGRADING POTENCY
You'll often want to upgrade the potency of a 
magic weapon
 or 
magic armor you already have. This requires etching a higher-level 
potency rune, and in some cases also requires you to upgrade the quality of the item first (as described on page 190). The following tables 
summarize the Price of each step, with a number in parentheses indicating the item's level for the Craft activity.
TABLE 11–3: ARMOR UPGRADE PRICES
Starting ArmorImproved Armor
Price and Process
Expert armor+1 expert armor
25 gp to etch +1 light or medium armor potency (level 3), or 50 gp to etch 
+1 heavy armor potency (level 4)
+1 expert armor
+2 expert armor
300 gp to etch +2 armor potency (level 7)
+2 expert armor
+3 master armor325 gp to upgrade quality of light or medium armor, or 310 gp to upgrade quality 
of heavy armor (level 7); then 730 gp to etch 
+3 armor potency (level 11)
+2 master armor+3 master armor730 gp to etch +3 armor potency (level 11)
+3 master armor+4 master armor5,100 gp to etch 
+4 armor potency (level 15)
+4 master armor+5 legendary armor6,140 gp to upgrade quality (level 15), then 27,360 gp to etch 
+5 armor potency (level 19)
+4 legendary armor+5 legendary armor27,360 gp to etch 
+5 armor potency (level 19)
TABLE 11–4: WEAPON UPGRADE PRICES
Starting Weapon
Improved Weapon
Price and Process
Expert weapon
+1 expert weapon
65 gp to etch +1 weapon potency
 (level 4)
+1 expert weapon
+2 expert weapon
400 gp to etch +2 weapon potency
 (level 8)
+2 expert weapon
+3 master weapon
325 gp to upgrade quality (level 8), then 1,175 gp to etch 
+3 weapon potency
 (level 12)
+2 master weapon
+3 master weapon
1,175 gp to etch 
+3 weapon potency
 (level 12)
+3 master weapon
+4 master weapon
8,000 gp to etch +4 weapon potency
 (level 16)
+4 master weapon
+5 legendary weapon
6,140 gp to upgrade quality (level 16), then 53,860 gp to etch 
+5 weapon potency
 (level 20)
+4 legendary weapon
+5 legendary weapon
53,860 gp to etch +5 weapon potency
 (level 20)
373 You can activate a 
dancing weapon by speaking a command 
word and releasing the weapon into the air. The weapon then 
dances through the air, fighting on its own against the last 
enemy you attacked, or the nearest enemy to it if your target 
has been defeated.
While it's activated, at the end of your turn each round, the 
weapon can Fly up to its fly Speed of 40 feet, and then can 
either Fly again or Strike one creature within its reach. While 
the weapon is considered to have a space of 5 feet, it does 
not block or impede enemies attempting to move though that 
space, it doesn't benefit from or provide flanking, and enemies 
can block its passage through their spaces. The weapon can't 
use reactions, and its Fly actions don't trigger reactions. 
While it's activated, a 
dancing weapon makes Strikes with an 
attack modifier of +24 plus its item bonus to attack rolls from its 
potency rune, if any. It uses the weapon's normal damage but has 
a +0STrength modifier. The weapon's abilities that automatically 
trigger on a hit or critical hit still function, but the weapon can't 
use its activated abilities or any of your abilities while dancing.
Each round, when the weapon is finished using its actions, 
attempt a DC 7 flat check. If you fail the check, the activation 
ends and the weapon falls to the ground.
DISRUPTING RUNE 
5+Method of Use etched, melee weapon
A disrupting weapon deals extra damage to 
undead. Undead hit by an attack with a 
disrupting weapon takes 
extra positive damage and additional effects on critical hit.
Type
 standard;
 Level
 5; Price 150 gpThe weapon deals 1d6 extra positive damage. On a critical hit, 
the undead is enfeebled 1 until the end of your next turn.
Type
 greater;
 Level
 15 (Uncommon), Price 6,200 gpThe weapon deals 2d6 extra positive damage. On a critical hit, 
the undead creature must attempt a DC 32 Fortitude save with 
the following effects. 
Success The target is enfeebled 2 until the end of your next turn.
Critical Success The target is enfeebled 1 until the end of your 
next turn.
Failure
 The target is enfeebled 3 until the end of your next turn.
Critical Failure
 The target is destroyed.
ENERGY RESISTANT
 RUNE 
9+Method of Use etched, armorYou gain resistance to acid, cold, electricity, or fire 
in the listed amount. The crafter chooses the type of resistance 
when the rune is etched into the armor. Multiple 
energy resistant 
runes can be etched onto a single suit of armor; rather than using 
only the highest-level efiect, each must provide resistance to a 
different type of damage.
Type
 standard;
 Level
 9; Price 680 gp; Resistance 
5 Type
 greater;
 Level
 13; Price 2,900 gp; Resistance 
10 ETHEREAL RUNE 
17
Price 13,500 gpMethod of Use etched, armorActivation
  Command Activation
MagicalNecromancy
Abjuration
MagicalConjuration
MagicalThis armor provides full defense against attacks by incorporeal 
creatures; their attacks target your AC instead of your TAC. 
Once per day, you can activate this armor to gain the effects 
of an ethereal jaunt
 spell. This doesn't require concentration and 
lasts for 1 hour or until you choose to return to material form as 
a free action at either the start or end of your turn.
Craft Requirements
 You must supply a casting of
 ethereal jaunt 
(9th level).
FLAMING RUNE 
9+Method of Use etched, weapon
This weapon is empowered by ffiickering fflame. 
The weapon deals 1d6 additional fire damage on 
a hit and additional effects on a critical hit. Type
 standard;
 Level
 9; Price 700 gpOn a critical hit, the target also takes 1d10 persistent fire
 damage. Type
 greater;
 Level
 14; Price 4,500 gpOn a critical hit, the target also takes 2d10 persistent fire 
damage. Fire damage dealt by this weapon (including the 
persistent fire damage) ignores the target's fire resistance.
FORTIFICATION
 RUNE 
12+Method of Use etched, medium or heavy armor
Each time you're hit by a critical hit while wearing 
fortification armor, attempt a fflat check with the listed DC. If you 
succeed, that critical hit becomes a normal hit. This property 
thickens the armor, increasing its Bulk by 1.
Type
 standard;
 Level
 12; Price 2,000 gp; DC 17 Type
 greater;
 Level
 18; Price 24,000 gp; 
DC 14 FROST RUNE 
9+Method of Use etched, weapon
This weapon is empowered with freezing ice. It 
deals 1d6 additional cold damage each time it hits. On a critical hit, the target is also slowed 1 until the end of your 
next turn.
Type
 standard;
 Level
 9; Price 700 gpType
 greater;
 Level
 14; Price 4,500 gpCreatures slowed by a critical hit from this weapon can't spend 
reactions. Cold damage dealt by this weapon ignores the target's 
cold resistance. 
GHOST TOUCH
 RUNE 
4 Price 100 gpMethod of Use etched, melee weapon
A ghost touch weapon is particularly efiective against incorporeal 
creatures, which almost always have a speciflc weakness to 
ghost touch weapons. Unlike with most physical objects, incorporeal 
creatures can touch, hold, and wield 
ghost touch weapons.
GLAMERED RUNE 
5 Price 140 gpMethod of Use etched, armorActivation
  Focus Activation
With a mere thought, you can change the shape and appearance 
Conjuration
Fire
MagicalAbjuration
MagicalColdConjuration
MagicalMagicalTransmutation
IllusionMagical374of this armor to appear as ordinary or flne clothes. The armor's 
statistics do not change. Only a creature that is benefiting 
from 
true seeing or a similar efiect can attempt to disbelieve 
this illusion. HOLY
 RUNE 
11
Price 1,400 gp
Method of Use etched, weapon without an 
unholy runeActivation
  Command Activation; 
Trigger 
Your attack roll 
with this weapon is a success or a critical success against an 
evil creature.
A weapon with this rune deals 1d6 additional good damage 
against evil targets. If you are evil, you become enfeebled 2 while 
wielding or carrying this weapon.
When you activate the weapon, you regain Hit Points equal to 
twice the level of the evil creature.
Craft Requirements
 You must be good-aligned.
INVISIBILITY RUNE 
8+Method of Use etched, light armorActivation
  Command Activation
Once per day, you can whisper the command word to become 
invisible for 1 minute, gaining the effects of a 2nd-level 
invisibility spell. 
Type
 standard;
 Level
 8; Price 500 gpType
 greater;
 Level
 10; Price 1,000 gpYou can activate the armor up to 3 times per day.
Craft Requirements
 You must supply a casting of 
invisibility.
Evocation
GoodMagicalIllusionMagicalKEEN RUNE 
13
Price 3,000 gpMethod of Use 
etched, melee weapon that deals 
piercing or slashing damage
Attacks with this weapon are a critical hit on a 19 or 20 on the 
die as long as that result would otherwise be a success. This 
property doesn't make a 19 on the die an automatic success.
RETURNING RUNE 
4 Price 100 gpMethod of Use etched, thrown weapon
When you attempt a thrown Strike with this weapon, it ffiies 
back to your hand after the Strike action is completed. If your 
hands are full when the weapon returns, it falls to the ground 
in your space.
SHADOW
 RUNE 
5+Method of Use etched, light or medium nonmetallic armorArmor with this rune becomes hazy black, as if made with 
tangible shadow. You gain an item bonus to Stealth checks while 
wearing the armor. 
Type
 standard;
 Level
 5; Price 140 gp; Bonus +2 Type
 greater;
 Level
 14; Price 3,900 gp; Bonus +4 SHIFTING 
 RUNE 
5 Price 140 gpMethod of Use etched, melee weapon
Activation
  Operate Activation
MagicalTransmutation
Evocation
MagicalMagicalTransmutation
MagicalTransmutation
375 With a moment of manipulation, you can shift this weapon 
into a different weapon with a similar form. When you activate 
this weapon, it takes the shape of another melee weapon that 
requires the same number of hands to wield. The weapon's 
potency, any special material, and properties now apply to the 
weapon's new shape. Any property runes that can't apply to the 
new form are suppressed until the item takes a shape to which 
they can be applied.
SHOCK RUNE 
9+Method of Use etched, weapon
Electric arcs crisscross this weapon each time it 
hits, dealing 1d6 additional electricity damage on a successful attack. On a critical hit, electricity arcs out to damage 
to up to two other creatures of your choice within 10 feet of the 
initial target. Type
 standard;
 Level
 9; Price 700 gpOn a critical hit, the weapon deals 1d6 electricity damage to 
each additional creature. 
Type
 greater;
 Level
 14; Price 4,500 gpThe weapon also deals 2d6 persistent electricity damage 
to the initial target, and the electricity damage from this 
weapon ignores the initial target's electricity resistance. On 
a critical hit, the weapon deals 2d6 electricity damage to the 
additional creature.
SLICK RUNE 
4+Method of Use etched, armorThis property makes armor slippery, as though 
it were coated with a thin fllm of oil. You gain an item bonus 
to Acrobatics checks to Escape or Squeeze, depending on the 
version of the rune.
Type
 standard;
 Level
 4; Price 80 gp; Bonus +2 Type
 greater;
 Level
 13; Price 2,400 gp; 
Bonus +4 SPEED RUNE 
16
Price 10,000 gpMethod of Use etched, weapon
While wielding a speed weapon, you gain the quick condition, 
but you can use the additional action granted only to make a 
Strike with the etched weapon.
SPELL STORING
 RUNE 
13
Price 3,000 gpMethod of Use etched, melee weapon
Activation
  Command Activation; 
Requirements
 On your 
previous action this turn, you hit and damaged a creature with 
the weapon. 
A spellcaster can spend 1 minute to cast a 3rd-level or lower spell 
into the weapon, storing it for later. The spell must be able to 
target a creature other than the caster. When you wield a 
spell storing weapon, you immediately know the name and level of the 
spell stored in the weapon. 
When you activate the rune, you unleash the stored spell, 
treating the target of the triggering attack as the target of the 
spell, using a spell roll modifier of +20 (DC 30) if necessary. This 
ElectricityEvocation
MagicalMagicalTransmutation
MagicalTransmutation
Magicalempties the spell from the weapon and allows a spell to be cast 
into it again. You can harmlessly expend the stored spell with a 
Focus Activation action without spending any RP.
A spell storing weapon found as treasure has a 50% chance of 
having a spell of the GM's choice stored in it.
UNHOLY
 RUNE 
11
Price 1,400 gp
Method of Use etched, weapon without a 
holy runeActivation
  Command Activation; 
Trigger 
You  
critically succeed at an attack roll on a good-aligned creature 
with the weapon.
A weapon with this rune deals 1d6 additional evil damage when 
it hits a good target. If you are good, you become enfeebled 2 
while carrying or wielding this weapon.
When you activate the weapon, the target of your critical hit 
takes 1d4 persistent bleed damage, plus 1d4 additional persistent 
bleed damage for each point of the weapon's item bonus to attack 
rolls from its potency rune, if any.
Craft Requirements
 You must be evil. 
VOID
 RUNE 
15
Price 6,500 gpMethod of Use etched, melee or thrown weapon
Activation
  Command Activation
Attacks with the etched weapon deal 1d6 additional negative 
damage on a hit. When you activate the weapon, it transforms 
into darkness and negative energy, allowing attacks with the 
weapon to pass through armor easily for 1 round.
When you attack a creature wearing armor while the etched 
weapon is activated, you compare the attack roll result to 
the target's TAC instead of AC. The activated weapon passes 
harmlessly through nonliving matter, and consequently it can't 
damage constructs, objects, or undead. VORPAL
 RUNE 
17
Price 15,000 gpMethod of Use 
etched, melee weapon that deals 
slashing damageActivation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You roll a natural 20 
and critically succeed at a Strike with the weapon targeting a 
creature with at least one head. 
When you activate a 
vorpal 
weapon, the triggering creature 
must succeed at a DC 35 Fortitude save, or it is decapitated. This 
kills any creature except ones that don't require a head to live 
(such as constructs, oozes, and some aberrations and undead). 
For creatures with multiple heads (such as ettins or hydras), this 
usually kills the creature only if you sever its last
 head. WOUNDING
 RUNE 
6 Price 250 gpMethod of Use 
etched, melee weapon that deals 
either piercing or slashing damage
When you hit a creature with a 
wounding
 weapon, the target 
takes 1d4 persistent bleed damage. On a critical hit, it instead 
takes 1d8 persistent bleed damage. Evil
Evocation
MagicalMagicalNecromancy
Evocation
MagicalMagicalNecromancy
376 Wondrous items of magical make can give characters 
a hero's edge when facing slavering monsters, cunning 
socialites, and other tests of their mettle. The following section presents the magic items available to characters 
in Pathfinder. It begins with the rules for how to use 
magic items during gameplay, then reviews the different 
types of magic items available in the game: ammunition, armor and weapons, oils and potions, scrolls, shields, staves, and trinkets. Finally, the Catalog of Items contains 
descriptions of the magic items available in the game. Each magic item includes a stat block, as described on 
page 344.USING MAGIC ITEMS
Harnessing the magic within a 
belt of regeneration to heal 
your wounds or triggering your celestial armor to sprout 
glowing wings requires more than a simple command 
word. Your own willpower is what allows you to access 
the magic in your items. Once you've exhausted your 
internal reserves, you can push yourself only so far before 
magic items become beyond your ability to use. RESONANCE
 P
OINTS
Your innate ability to use magic items is represented 
by a pool of Resonance Points (RP). Your maximum 
number of Resonance Points is equal to your level plus your Charisma modifier. These points refresh during your 
daily preparations. Most magic items must be either activated with 
Resonance Points when you want to use the item (see 
Activating Magic Items below) or invested with Resonance 
Points beforehand to unlock their ongoing effects (see 
Investing Magic Items on page 377). Typically, you activate 
items you hold and invest items you wear, though some 
held items need to be invested to give their full benefit and 
some worn items also have activated powers. CONSTANT
 ABILITIES
Some magic items have abilities that always function, 
even without the expenditure of Resonance Points. An 
everburning torch always sheds light, and a fiaming weapon causes fire damage every time it deals damage. 
Such an item has neither an activation entry nor the 
invested trait. 
ACTIVATING MAGIC
 ITE
MSActivated magic items produce effects only upon activation. 
The Activate an Item activity allows you to spend Resonance 
Points for this purpose. You need to use special actions 
for this activity: Command Activation, Focus Activation, 
and Operate Activation. Some items require you to have 
previously invested them before their activated abilities can 
be used (see Investing Magic Items on page 377).ACTIVATE AN ITEM
Requirement
 You can Activate an Item you're wearing only if you 
have invested it. 
Cost 1 Resonance Point, spent when you start taking activate 
actions for this activityYou activate an item's magical ability. Activating an Item is an 
activity that takes a variable number of actions, depending on 
the item. The activate actions required are listed in the stat block. 
You can spend those actions in any order you wish, provided 
you do so consecutively on a single turn. As soon as all activate 
actions are complete, the item's efiect occurs. If an item has 
multiple abilities that can be activated, you must choose which 
one to use each time you Activate the Item.
Some items allow you to use an activate action as a reaction 
or free action. In this case, you Activate the Item as a reaction or 
free action instead of as an activity. Such cases are noted in the 
item's stat block (for example, "
 Focus Activation reaction").
Unless specified otherwise, activating a magic item 
costs 1 Resonance Point. You spend the Resonance 
Point when you start an Activate an Item activity. If an 
item's activation doesn't require you to spend Resonance 
Points, this is noted in its Activation entry (for example, "Command Activation, no cost").An item's activated abilities happen instantly unless the 
item's description indicates a duration. If a magic item's 
ability lasts until it is deactivated, anyone wielding or 
wearing the item can deactivate the item by performing its 
item activation requirements, though deactivating an item 
doesn't require spending any Resonance Points.
Some items, such as potions, are activated by being 
imbibed or otherwise consumed with an Operate 
Activation action. These types of consumables can also 
be fed or applied to you when you're unconscious or 
unwilling, which requires the administering character to 
instead use an Interact action. In this case, the item still 
activates as if you had used Operate Activation, and it 
spends your Resonance Points. 
Activate Actions
The actions you take to Activate an Item all have the 
activate trait. As noted in Activate an Item, some items 
let you turn activate actions into reactions or free actions. COMMAND ACTIVATION
You speak a word of power to activate a magical 
power of a magic item you wield or wear.
 FOCUS ACTIVATION
You think a speciflc thought to activate a magical 
power of a magic item you wield or wear.
 OPERATE ACTIVATION
Requirement
 You must be wielding a held item or 
touching any other item with a free hand. 
Activate
Auditory
Concentrate
Activate
Concentrate
Activate
Manipulate
MAGIC ITEMS
377 You take physical actions necessary to activate a magic item 
you wield or wear, such as drinking a potion, striking a chime, 
touching a jewel, or twisting a knob.
Disrupting Activations
If you take damage from a reaction triggered by an activate 
action, reaction, or free action, the entire activation may 
be disrupted. If the damage is equal to or greater than your 
level, you fail to Activate the Item and lose the Resonance 
Point spent as well as the triggering action, reaction, and 
free action. If the item can be activated only a certain 
number of times per day, the failed activation still counts 
against that limit. If an item requires you to use activate 
actions to continue its activating effect and that activation 
is disrupted, the item's effect is dismissed.
INVESTING MAGIC ITEMS
Most magic items that are worn, as well as some held 
items, must be invested with Resonance Points during the 
Invest Item activity in order to gain their benefits. These 
items have the invested trait. Investing an item costs 1 
Resonance Point, which you spend when you complete the 
Invest Item activity.
Many invested items have constant abilities that function 
all the time or that always trigger when you use the item. 
These fail to function if the item is not invested by you. 
INVEST AN ITEM
Cost 1 Resonance Point
You invest your energy in an item with the invested 
trait as you don or hold it. This process requires Interact actions 
for at least 1 minute, with the exact time determined by the GM 
depending on the item. You benefit from the item's constant 
abilities as long as you meet its other requirements (for most 
invested items, the only other requirement is that you must be 
wearing the item). This investiture lasts until your next daily 
preparations or until someone else invests the item.
If an invested item has activated powers, you might still have 
to spend Resonance Points to Activate the Item, and you can't 
use those powers if you haven't Invested the Item. 
OVERSPENDING RESONANCE
It's possible to activate or invest items, even when you're out 
of Resonance Points. Each time you try to Activate an Item 
or Invest an Item when you have 0 RP remaining, you must 
attempt a flat check with a DC equal to 10 plus the number 
of points you've overspent, including any spent for that 
attempted activation. Your check can have the results below.
Success: You activate or invest the item normally.
Failure:
 You fail to activate or invest the item, and you 
can't attempt to activate or invest the same item again until 
the next time you undergo your daily preparations. You 
can still attempt to activate or invest other items of the 
same type, but not the specific item you failed to use. If you 
had already invested the item, you lose that investiture. Critical Failure:
 You fail to activate or invest the item, 
Concentrate
Manipulate
and you can't attempt to activate or invest any magic items 
until the next time you undergo your daily preparations. 
Any other items you already invested still function, as do 
items with constant abilities that don't require investiture.
LIMITED ACTIVATIONS
Some magic items can be activated only a limited number 
of times per day, as described in the item. This limit is 
independent of any Resonance Point costs for activating the 
item; if such an item has reached its daily limit, you can't 
activate it again that day even if you have Resonance Point 
remaining. The limit resets during your daily preparations. 
The limit is inherent to the item, so if an ability that can be 
used only once per day is used, it doesn't refresh if another 
creature later invests or tries to activate the item. 
TYPES OF MAGIC ITEMS
Each of the following types of magic items in Pathfinder 
are associated with specific rules and requirements. 
AMMUNITION
 Some magic items are ammunition for ranged weapons. 
Their stat blocks include an ammunition entry that lists 
which type of ammunition it is, or "any" if it's not limited 
to any particular type. All stat blocks for ammunition 
omit the Method of Use and Bulk entries; use the standard 
rules in Chapter 6: Equipment for reloading and Bulk. When using magic ammunition, use your ranged 
weapon's potency rune (see page 370), if any, to determine 
the bonus to your attack roll and the amount of damage 
you deal with the magic ammunition. However, don't 
add your weapon's property runes unless the ammunition 
states otherwise. The ammunition creates its own effects. 
Regardless of whether a character's attack with magic 
ammunition hits or misses, launching the ammunition 
consumes its magic. 
Activated Ammunition 
Many pieces of magic ammunition must be activated before 
being fired. Once you activate this type of ammunition, 
you must shoot the ammunition before the end of your 
turn. Otherwise, it deactivates (though it isn't consumed) 
and you must activate it again before you can use it. If 
you use this type of ammunition without activating it, it 
functions as nonmagical ammunition of the same type and 
is still consumed. The action required to activate the ammunition doesn't 
alter how many actions it takes to reload. For example, 
you could activate a beacon shot arrow with an Operate 
Activation by touching it, then draw and shoot it as part 
of a Strike as normal. For a 
beacon shot bolt, you could 
activate it, load it into a crossbow, then shoot it, or load it 
into the crossbow, then activate it, and then shoot it.
ARMOR AND WEAPONS
Many magic armors and weapons are created by etching 
378runes onto them. Specially constructed specific suits of 
armor and weapons have abilities far different from those 
of rune-etched versions. They have their own listings 
among the other magic items in the Catalog of Items. A 
specific magic suit of armor or magic weapon always lists 
the potency rune it has. You can upgrade or transfer its 
potency rune as normal, though you can't etch property 
runes onto it. More information can be found beginning 
on page 370.
OILS AND POTIONS
Oils and potions are magical gels, liquids, ointments, 
pastes, or salves that are consumed when applied (in the 
case of oils), or drunk (in the case of potions). Oils have 
the oil trait and potions have the potion trait, and specific 
oils and potions available in the game are described in the 
Catalog of Items. Activating Oils
You can activate an oil by applying it to its target, 
which is usually an object. This usually takes two hands, 
as indicated in an oil's stat block: one to hold the jar 
containing the oil, and another to extract the oil and apply 
it. An item or creature you apply the oil to must be within 
your reach. Because the process is so thorough, it is usually 
impossible to apply an oil to an unwilling target or an item 
in the possession of an unwilling target unless that target is 
paralyzed, petrified, or unconscious. Activating Potions
You can activate a potion either by drinking it (which 
usually requires an Operate Activation action) or by feeding 
it to another creature (which instead requires an Interact 
action). Either method usually takes one hand, as indicated 
in a potion's stat block. You can feed a potion to another 
creature only if that creature is paralyzed, unconscious, or 
willing. Either way, the creature drinking the potion must 
spend any required Resonance Points to use the potion. If 
it can't, such as if it fails the flat check when overspending 
Resonance Points, the potion is wasted. POTENT
When you invest an item that has the potent trait, it 
improves one of your ability scores, either increasing it 
by 2 or increasing it to a total of 18, whichever grants the 
higher score. This gives you the benefits of the new ability 
score: increasing Intelligence lets you become trained in 
an additional skill, increasing Charisma adds to your 
Resonance Points, increasing Constitution gives you more 
Hit Points, and so on. These benefits go away once the 
investiture runs out. A potent item grants this benefit only the first time it's 
invested within a 24-hour period, and you can benefit 
from only one potent item at a time. If you attempt to 
invest a potent item when you already have one invested, 
you don't gain the ability score increase, though you do 
gain any other effects of investing the item. SCROLLS
A scroll contains a single spell, which you can cast without 
having to expend a spell slot. Scrolls are always consumable 
magic items with the scroll trait. The spell on a scroll can be 
cast only once, after which the scroll is destroyed. The spell 
on the scroll is cast at a particular spell level, as determined 
by the scroll. For instance, a scroll of magic missile (level 1) 
could be used to cast the 1st-level version of magic missile, but not a magic missile heightened to 2nd level. If no level 
is listed, the scroll is for the spell's lowest level.
If you find a scroll, you can spend 1 minute trying to 
figure out what spell is on the scroll. If the spell is on your 
spell list, you automatically learn what the spell is after 
this time. If not, you must Identify a Magic Item (see pages 
154 and 156) as normal. Casting a Spell from a Scroll
Casting a spell from a scroll requires holding the scroll in 
one hand and performing a Cast a Spell activity using the 
normal spellcasting actions for the spell. You activate the 
scroll as part of the first spellcasting action you use, and 
you must spend 1 Resonance Point at this time. To cast a spell from a scroll, you must have the spell 
on your spell list and be able to use the spellcasting 
actions listed in the spell's entry. Because you're the one 
casting the spell, use your spell roll and spell DC, up to a 
maximum depending on the scroll's level (see Table 11–5: 
Scroll Statistics). The spell also gains the appropriate trait 
for your tradition (arcane, divine, occult, or primal).Any physical material components and cost were already 
provided when the scroll was crafted, but you must spend 
a Somatic Casting action in place of each Material Casting 
action required to cast the spell. If the spell requires a focus, 
you must still have that focus to cast the spell from a scroll. Scroll Statistics
Most of a scroll's statistics are determined by the spell it 
can be used to cast. Level:
 The scroll's item level depends on the spell level of 
the spell it holds, as shown on Table 11–5: Scroll Statistics. 
Cantrips and powers can't be put on scrolls.
Traits:
 A scroll has the consumable, magical, and scroll 
traits, plus the traits of the spell stored in it. Rarity: The scroll's rarity is the same as the spell's rarity.
Spell Roll Cap: This is the scroll's maximum spell roll. 
DAILY PREPARATIONS
During your daily preparations, it's a good idea to invest items you 
intend to wear and carry that day. This is part of the normal hour 
of preparation and lets you avoid having to spend time to invest 
the items later or being caught without your item's abilities when 
you need them. 
379 Its maximum spell DC is 10 + its maximum spell roll. You 
use these statistics or your own when casting a spell from 
a scroll, whichever is lower.
Price: The Price of a scroll is determined by the spell's 
level, as shown on the table. Add the spell's cost, if any.
Physical Characteristics:
 Unless noted otherwise, scrolls 
are light Bulk and require one hand. TABLE 11–5: SCROLL STATISTICS
Spell Level
Item Level
Spell Roll Cap
Scroll Price
11+83 gp23+108 gp35+1220 gp47+1445 gp59+1790 gp611+20175 gp713+23400 gp815+26800 gp917+292,000 gpSHIELDS
Unlike magic armor, magic shields can't be etched with 
runes granting potency or properties. All magic shields are 
specific items with a wide variety of protective effects, as 
described in their entries. STAVES
Each magical staff is infused with a spellcaster's personal 
spell energy and harnessed to cast a variety of spells. These 
items all have the staff trait. The spells that can be cast 
from a staff are listed in bullet points under each version 
of the staff, with the level of each spell in parentheses. 
Many staves have more powerful versions that contain 
more spells and can hold more charges—such a staff 
always contains the spells of all lower-level versions in 
addition to the spells in its own entry.
Investing a Staff
To cast any of a staff's spells or benefit from its other 
abilities, you must first invest the staff. Investing a new 
staff takes 1 hour, but you can invest a staff as part of your 
daily preparation without adding any additional time to 
the preparations. When invested during preparation (but 
not if invested at other times), the staff gains a number 
of charges equal to your highest-level spell slot, though 
it can never exceed its maximum charges. Once you have 
charged the staff in this way, no one else can invest the 
same staff to add charges to it for 24 hours. Charges 
remain in a staff indefinitely until used. You can invest only one staff at a time. If you invest 
another staff when you have another one currently 
invested, you must expend a number of charges equal to 
your highest-level spell slot, as transferring your personal 
spell energy is taxing. These charges can be divided in any 
way you choose between the two staves. If the two staves 
don't have that many charges between them, you fail to 
invest the new staff. Once you invest the new staff, you 
lose your investiture in the old staff. If you didn't invest a staff during preparations, you can 
still invest a staff later during the day. The first staff you 
invest in a day neither gains nor loses charges, but any 
later staves you invest require expending charges as above.
A staff has no charges in it when first crafted. When a 
staff is found as treasure, the number of charges it has can 
be determined randomly or otherwise chosen by the GM. Casting Spells from a Staff
Casting a spell from a staff requires holding the staff in 
one or both hands, as indicated in the staff's stat block, 
and performing a Cast a Spell activity using the normal 
spellcasting actions for the staff. You activate the staff as 
part of the first spellcasting action you use, and you must 
spend 1 Resonance Point at this time. At the same time, 
you must also either expend a number of charges from the 
staff equal to the spell level of the spell you're casting or 
else sacrifice one of your spell slots of the same level or a 
higher level than the spell you're casting. To cast a spell from a staff, you must have the spell on 
your spell list and be able to use the spellcasting actions 
listed in the spell's entry. Because you're the one casting 
the spell, use your spell roll and spell DC for any spell 
you cast from a staff. The spell also gains the appropriate 
trait for your tradition (arcane, divine, occult, or primal). 
You must provide any material components, cost, or focus 
required by the spell or you fail to cast it. If a staff contains a cantrip, you can cast that cantrip 
using the staff without expending a spell slot, and 
activating the staff to cast the cantrip doesn't cost any 
Resonance Points. The spell's level is heightened to the 
same level as cantrips you normally cast. You cannot 
heighten other spells cast from a staff, although some 
staves contain spells that have already been heightened by 
1 or more higher levels, which you can cast normally.
While holding a staff, you can use Somatic Casting 
actions even without a hand free by gesturing with the 
staff instead of your hand, regardless of whether you're 
casting spells from the staff or any of your other spells. Attacking with a Staff
Staves are also expert-quality staff weapons (see page 
190), and this is included in their Price. They can be 
etched with runes as normal. TRINKETS
An item with the trinket trait is a magical charm, gem, 
stone, or other small object affixed to armor, a shield, or 
a weapon (called the affixed item). Each trinket holds a 
sliver of combat knowledge or magical energy that can be 
unleashed for a momentary boost of power or enhanced 
ability. Many trinkets can be activated as a free action 
when you use a particular type of action or activity.
You must be wielding or wearing an item to activate a 
380trinket attached to it. Once activated, a trinket burns out 
permanently, usually crumbling into a fine dust. 
Affixing a Trinket
Each trinket's stat block indicates the type of item to which 
it can be affixed. Affixing and removing a trinket are both 
specialized uses of the Repair activity (see page 147). On 
a success, instead of repairing 1 Dent, you affix or remove 
the trinket from the item. A single trinket can be affixed to 
only one item at a time, and affixing a new trinket burns 
out any trinket already on the affixed item. WANDS
Short, slender items typically made of wood, wands let 
you cast a specific spell. They can be used only a certain 
number of times before burning out. Each wand holds a 
specific spell of a certain level, determined when the wand 
is created. The spell can't be heightened.
Casting Spells from a Wand
Casting a spell from a wand requires holding the wand in 
one hand and performing a Cast a Spell activity using the 
normal spellcasting actions for the spell. You activate the 
wand as part of the first spellcasting action you use, and 
you must spend 1 Resonance Point at this time. At the 
same time, you expend one of the wand's charges.
To cast a spell from a wand, you must have the spell 
on your spell list and be able to use the spellcasting 
actions listed in the spell's entry. Because you're the one 
casting the spell, use your spell roll and spell DC, up to a 
maximum depending on the wand's level (see Table 11–6: 
Wand Statistics). The spell also gains the appropriate trait 
for your tradition (arcane, divine, occult, or primal).Any physical material components and cost were 
provided when the wand was crafted, but you must spend 
a Somatic Casting action in place of each Material Casting 
action required to cast the spell. If the spell requires a 
focus, you must still have that focus to cast the spell. In 
many cases, this focus is built into the wand (increasing 
the wand's price by the focus's price).
While holding a wand, you can use Somatic Casting 
actions even without a hand free by gesturing with the 
wand instead of your hand, regardless of whether you're 
casting spells from the wand or any of your other spells. Wand Statistics
Most of a wand's statistics are determined by the spell it 
can be used to cast. Wands can contain spells up to 4th 
level, and each wand casts its spell at only one specific 
spell level. Level:
 A wand's item level depends on the spell level of 
the spell it holds, as shown in Table 11–6: Wand Statistics. 
Cantrips and powers can't be put in wands.
Traits:
 A wand has the magical and wand traits, plus the 
traits of the spell stored in it. Rarity: The wand's rarity is the same as the spell's rarity.
Spell Roll Cap: This is the wand's maximum spell roll. 
Its maximum spell DC is 10 + its maximum spell roll. You 
use this or your own statistic when casting a spell from the 
wand, whichever is lower.
Price: The Price of a wand is determined by the spell's 
level, as shown on the table. A wand with fewer than its 
maximum charges might cost less, as determined by the 
GM. If a wand contains a spell with a cost, add 10 times 
that cost to the wand's Price.
Charges: A wand is similar to a consumable item, 
but unlike consumables it isn't destroyed when first 
used. Instead, it has 10 charges when first crafted, one 
of which is expended each time a spell is cast from the 
wand. Once the charges are depleted, the wand becomes 
nonmagical. The number of charges in a wand you find 
might be determined randomly or otherwise decided by 
the GM. 
TABLE 11–6: WAND STATISTICS
Spell Level
Item Level
Spell Roll Cap
Wand Price
12+827 gp24+1072 gp36+12180 gp48+14405 gpCATALOG OF ITEMS
These magic items are organized alphabetically. If you're 
looking for items of a certain level or category, go to the 
treasure tables on pages 349–353.AEON STONE
 ITEM 
1+Method of Use worn; 
Bulk —Over millennia, these mysterious, intricately cut 
gemstones have been hoarded by mystics and 
fanatics hoping to discover their secrets. When you invest one of 
these precisely shaped crystals, the stone orbits your head and 
conveys its effects to you. You can stow an 
aeon stone with an 
Interact action, and an orbiting stone can be snatched out of the 
air with a successful Disarm action against you.
There are various types of 
aeon stones, each with a different 
efiect. Each aeon stone also gains a resonant power when slotted 
into a wayfinder 
(see page 413).Type 
clear spindle; Level
 8; Price 425 gpYou don't need to eat or drink while you have a 
clear spindle aeon stone invested. This 
aeon stone doesn't function until it 
has been worn continuously for a week and invested each day 
therein. Removing it resets this attunement period.
The resonant power allows you to cast 
air bubble as an innate 
primal spell once per day at a cost of 1 Resonance Point. 
Type 
dull gray; 
Level
 1; Price 5 gpA dull gray
 aeon stone has lost its special magical properties, 
sometimes as a result of overusing a 
tourmaline sphere 
or ellipsoid aeon stone
. It still orbits your head like any other 
aeon stone
 and can thus serve as a stylish hands-free option for various spells 
that target an object, like 
continual flame. Dull gray aeon stones
 have no resonant power. 
Invested
MagicalTransmutation
381 Type 
gold nodule; Level
 10; Price 875 gpWhen a 
gold nodule aeon stone is created, its creator chooses a 
language she knows to store in it. When you invest the
 stone, you 
gain the ability to understand, speak, and write that language. 
You can have only one 
gold nodule aeon stone invested at a time.
The resonant power allows you to cast 
comprehend language 
as an innate occult spell once per day.
Type 
lavender and green ellipsoid; 
Level
 19; Price 30,000 gpThis functions as a pale lavender ellipsoid, but replicates the 
efiect of an 8th-level 
dispel magic spell with a spell roll of +28.
The resonant power allows you to cast 
detect magic 
and read 
aura 
as innate arcane spells.
Type 
orange prism; Level
 16; Price 9,750 gp
Just before your first spellcasting action to Cast a Spell, you 
can activate this 
aeon stone with a Focus Activation action. If you 
do, treat that spell as 1 level higher (maximum 10th level) for the 
purpose of dispelling and being dispelled. The resonant power grants a +3 item bonus to Arcana, Nature, 
Occultism, or Religion checks—whichever corresponds to the 
tradition of the last spell you enhanced with this 
aeon stone. Type
 pale lavender ellipsoid; 
Level
 13; Price 2,400 gp
You can use a Focus Activation reaction to activate this stone 
when a spell targets you. This replicates the efiect of a 6th-level 
dispel magic spell with a spell roll of +20 in an attempt to dispel 
the triggering spell. This can't be used on spells that target an 
area, unless they also speciflcally target you. Every time you 
activate this 
aeon stone, attempt a DC 5 flat check. On a failure, 
the stone turns dull gray and loses its magical properties forever. 
The resonant power allows you to cast 
read aura 
as an innate 
arcane spell.
Type 
pink rhomboid; Level
 12; Price 1,900 gpWhen you invest this stone, you gain 15 temporary Hit Points. 
If the stone is deactivated, you lose any of the temporary HP 
remaining until it's reactivated. The temporary Hit Points refresh 
during your daily preparations; they do not refresh if you reinvest 
the stone, or another pink rhomboid aeon stone, before then.
The resonant power allows you to cast 
stabilize 
as an innate 
divine cantrip. Type 
tourmaline sphere; 
Level
 6; Price 250 gpWhen you would die from the dying condition (typically at 
dying 4) but have at least 1 Resonance Point, this 
aeon stone automatically activates (costing 1 RP) and reduces your dying 
value to 1 less than it takes to kill you (typically to dying 3), after 
which the stone turns dull gray and loses its magical properties 
forever. You can benefit from this ability
 only once per day, even 
if you have multiple such stones.
The resonant power allows you to cast 1st-level 
heal as an innate divine spell once per day with a cost of 1 Resonance Point.
ALABASTER RELIQUARY
 ITEM 
12
Price 250 gpMethod of Use affixed, shield;
 Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You use 
Shield Block with the affixed shield against a 
critically successful weapon or unarmed attack.
This tiny stone box holds some minor relic to a 
ConsumableDivineGoodHealingNecromancy
Trinket
good deity. When you activate the reliquary, the efiect depends 
on your alignment on the good–evil axis.

Ł Good Recover 4d8 Hit Points and reduce your frightened 
condition by 3.

Ł Neutral Recover 2d8 Hit Points.

Ł Evil
 Become sick 2.Craft Requirements
 You must be good.
ALCHEMIST GOGGLES
 ITEM 
7+Method of Use worn, eyepiece; 
Bulk —These brass goggles are engraved with flame 
patterns like scorch marks around thick glass 
lenses. While worn, they give you an item bonus to Crafting 
checks to craft alchemical items. In addition, whenever you throw 
an alchemical bomb, you ignore any penalty for screening. 
Type
 standard; 
Level
 7; Price 345 gpThe goggles provide a +2 bonus.
Type
 greater; 
Level
 16; Price 10,000 gpThe goggles provide a +4 item bonus to Crafting checks to 
craft alchemical items and a +2 item bonus to attack rolls when 
you throw alchemical bombs. 
ANKLETS OF ALACRITY
 ITEM 
14
Price 4,500 gpMethod of Use worn;
 Bulk —Activation
  Operate Activation
These golden anklets are studded with gems. They 
give you a +4 item bonus to Acrobatics checks. When you invest 
the anklets, you either increase your Dexterity score by 2 or 
increase it to 18, whichever would give you a higher score.
You can activate the anklets by clinking them together, gaining 
accelerated 20 and 
water walk
 for the next 10 minutes.
ANTIMAGIC OIL
 ITEM 
20
Price 9,000 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
When you apply this oil to armor, the creature 
wearing the armor becomes immune to all spells, effects of 
magic items (her own and those of others), and most effects with 
the magical trait for 1 minute, though the oil afiects neither the magic of the armor itself nor the potency of magical weapons. 
Magical effects from a source of level 20 or higher, such as a 
deity, still function on the armor's wearer.
ARMBANDS OF ATHLETICISM
 ITEM 
9+Method of Use worn; 
Bulk LSkilled awl work has imprinted images of a muscled 
weightlifter into these tiered leather bands, which 
grant enhanced stamina and skill when performing athletic 
exercises. While fastened to your upper arms, the bracers give 
you an item bonus to Athletics checks. In addition, whenever you 
spend an action to Climb or Swim and you succeed at the Athletics 
check, add a 5-foot item bonus to the distance you move.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 9; Price 145 gp; Bonus +3 Type
 greater; 
Level
 17; Price 13,000 gp; Bonus +5 Invested
MagicalTransmutation
Invested
MagicalPotent
Transmutation
Abjuration
ConsumableMagicalOilInvested
MagicalTransmutation
382 ARROWflCATCHING SHIELD
 ITEM 
11
Price 1,350 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation 
 Operate Activation; 
Trigger 
A ranged weapon 
Strike targets a creature within 15 feet of you when you have 
this shield raised. This master-quality heavy wooden shield (Hardness 6) is hand-
carved with images of overlapping fietched arrows. You must 
activate the shield before the triggering attacker rolls their attack. 
When you do, the triggering attacker's Strike targets you instead. 
If the attack hits, you gain the effects of the Shield Block reaction.
BAG OF HOLDING
 ITEM 
4+Method of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk 1 Activation
  Operate Activation
Though it appears to be a simple cloth sack, often decorated with panels of richly colored silk or stylish embroidery, 
a bag of holding opens into an extradimensional space larger 
than its outside dimensions. The Bulk held inside the bag doesn't 
change the Bulk of the bag of holding itself. The amount of Bulk 
the bag's extradimensional space can hold depends on its type. 
Though the bag can hold a great amount of material, an object 
still needs to be able to fit through the opening of the sack to be 
stored inside.
If the bag is overloaded or broken, it ruptures and is ruined, 
causing the items inside to be lost forever. If it's turned inside 
out, the items inside spill out unharmed, but the bag must be put right before it can be used again. A living creature placed 
inside the bag has enough air for 10 minutes before it begins to 
sufiocate, and it can attempt to Escape against a DC of 12. An 
item inside the bag provides no benefits unless it's retrieved first. 
An item in the bag can't be detected by magic that detects only 
things on the same plane. Type
 I; Level
 4; Price 80 gp; Capacity 25 BulkType
 II; Level
 7; Price 300 gp; Capacity 50 BulkType
 III; Level
 11; Price 1,200 gp; Capacity 100 BulkType
 IV; Level
 13; Price 2,400 gp; 
Capacity 150 BulkBALEFUL OIL
 ITEM 
8 Price 60 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
A non-good weapon anointed with this oil 
functions as a weapon with an 
unholy property 
rune for 1 minute. BARDING OF THE ZEPHYR
 ITEM 
13
Price 2,800 gpMethod of Use worn, barding; 
Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
This master-quality light barding is covered in stylized wind 
motifs. When you invest the barding while suiting up your animal 
companion, the barding adjusts to fit your animal companion 
regardless of its shape. While it's invested, if your companion falls, 
a wind picks it up from below—
feather fall is cast on it. You can activate the barding by tracing the wind motifs on 
Abjuration
MagicalConjuration
ExtradimensionalMagicalConsumableDivine Evil
Evocation
OilInvested
PrimalTransmutation
the barding, granting your companion wearing the barding a fiy 
Speed of 30 feet for 1 minute. Even if the companion doesn't have 
the mount trait, it can still Fly while being ridden. BARKSKIN POTION
 ITEM 
3 Price 8 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
After you drink this bitter draft, your skin takes on 
the consistency of tree bark. You gain the benefits of a 2nd-level 
barkskin spell for 1 minute. BEACON SHOT
 ITEM 
3 Price 7 gpAmmunition arrow, bolt
Activation
  Operate Activation
When an activated 
beacon shot hits a creature, it embeds itself 
into the target and spews out sparks for 1 minute. If the target 
is invisible, this allows creatures who would otherwise be 
unable to see it to automatically sense it. The sparks also negate 
concealment if the target is otherwise concealed. A creature can 
remove the arrow or bolt by using an Interact basic action and 
succeeding at a DC 17 Athletics check. 
BELT OF GIANT STRENGTH
 ITEM 
14
Price 4,500 gpMethod of Use worn, belt;
 Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation; 
Trigger 
You are 
targeted by a thrown rock attack or a rock would 
fall on you.
This thick leather belt is decorated with a buckle carved from 
glittering quartz in the shape of a mighty flst. You gain a +4 
item bonus to Athletics checks and a +2 circumstance bonus to 
Athletics checks to lift a heavy object, Break a Grapple, or Break 
an Object. When you invest the belt, you either increase your 
Strength score by 2 or increase it to 18, whichever would give 
you a higher score. 
When you activate the belt, attempt an Athletics check to 
grab the triggering rock, against the Athletics DC of the creature 
throwing the rock, the DC of the hazard or other efiect, or DC 33 
if no other DC is applicable. You must have a free hand to catch 
the rock, but you can release anything you're holding in a hand 
as part of this reaction.
Success You safely catch the rock, take no damage, and are 
now holding the rock.
Failure
 You take half damage.
Critical Failure
 You take full damage.
BELT OF REGENERATION
 ITEM 
14
Price 4,500 gpMethod of Use worn, belt;
 Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
This belt is crafted from rubbery, barely tanned 
troll hide that's mottled green and orange in color. You gain 14 
temporary Hit Points the first time you invest the belt in a day. 
When you invest the belt, you either increase your Constitution 
ConsumablePotion
PrimalTransmutation
ConsumableEvocation
MagicalInvested
MagicalPotent
Transmutation
Invested
MagicalNecromancy
Potent
383score by 2 or increase it to 18, whichever would give you a 
higher score.
You can activate the belt by tightening it one notch to gain 
a regeneration efiect. For 1d4 rounds, at the start of your turn 
each round, you recover 15 Hit Points unless you took acid or fire 
damage since the start of your previous turn.
BELT OF THE FIVE KINGS
 ITEM 
9 Price 650 gpMethod of Use worn, belt; 
Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
Made from interlocking plates of silver and gold, this heavy 
belt bears stylized miniature images of flve kingly dwarves. You 
receive a +1 circumstance bonus to Diplomacy checks to Make an 
Impression with dwarves or make a Request from dwarves, and 
a +1 circumstance bonus to Intimidation checks against giants 
and orcs.
The belt grants you darkvision and full understanding of the 
Dwarven language. If you are a dwarf, you can activate the belt 
to gain temporary Hit Points equal to your level and to grant 
allies within 20 feet of you darkvision; these effects both last 
for 10 minutes. BLESSED OIL
 ITEM 
8 Price 60 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
A non-evil weapon anointed with this oil functions 
as a weapon with a 
holy property rune for 1 minute.
BLOODLETTING KUKRI
 ITEM 
6 Price 250 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LThis +1 kukri has a crimson blade that shimmers eerily in bright 
light, almost as if it wept blood. On a critical hit, the kukri deals 
1d4 persistent bleed damage. If the target didn't already have 
persistent bleed damage when your critical hit, you also gain 
1d4 temporary Hit Points.
BLOODSEEKER BEAK
 ITEM 
2 Price 5 gpMethod of Use affixed, weapon;
 Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You deal 
sneak attack damage with the affixed weapon.
This enchanted, long, hollow proboscis is harvested from the 
notorious bloodseeker beast and drips a trickle of blood. When 
you activate the beak, you add 1d4 persistent bleed damage as 
an enhancement to the attack. 
BOOTS OF BOUNDING
 ITEM 
7+Method of Use worn, shoes; 
Bulk LThese boots give you an item bonus to your land 
Speed and an item bonus to Athletics checks to 
High Jump and Long Jump. In addition, when you use the Leap 
action, you can move 5 feet further if jumping horizontally or 
3 feet higher if jumping vertically.
EnchantmentInvested
MagicalInvested
PrimalTransmutation
ConsumableDivineEvocation
GoodOilMagicalNecromancy
ConsumableMagicalNecromancy
Trinket
Invested
MagicalTransmutation
Type 
standard; 
Level
 7; Price 340 gpThe boots increase your Speed by 5 feet and grant a +2 item 
bonus to jump. Type
 greater; 
Level
 14; Price 4,250 gpThe boots increase your Speed by 10 feet and grant +4 item 
bonus to jump. BOOTS OF ELVENKIND
 ITEM 
6+Method of Use worn, shoes;
 Bulk LActivation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger 
You use a 
move action.
These tall, pointed boots are made from soft, supple black or 
verdant leather and are decorated with trim and buckles of 
gold. When worn, the boots allow you to move more nimbly, 
giving you an item bonus to Acrobatics checks. When you 
activate the boots, you can ignore difficult terrain until the end 
of your turn.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 6; Price 235 gpThe boots grant a +2 bonus. Type
 greater; 
Level
 13; Price 2,850 gpThe boots grant a +4 bonus. If you're also wearing a 
greater 
cloak of elvenkind, greater boots of elvenkind 
constantly grant 
the effects of pass without trace 
(DC 30) in forest environments.
BOTTLED AIR
 ITEM 
7 Price 320 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
Appearing to be an ordinary corked glass bottle, this item 
contains a limitless supply of fresh air. You can activate the bottle 
when you uncork it, allowing anyone to breathe from it. Anyone 
holding the uncorked bottle can use an Interact action to draw 
a breath of air from the bottle in airless or toxic environments. 
After 1 hour, the bottle magically reseals itself until activated 
again. Air doesn't escape the mouth of the bottle on its own, so 
leaving the open bottle in an airless environment doesn't change 
the environment around it.
BRACERS OF ARMOR
 ITEM 
2+Method of Use worn, bracers; 
Bulk LThese simple armguards made of stifi leather 
grant you the benefits of 
mage armor at the spell 
level corresponding to their type as long as you wear them. 
You can affix trinkets to 
bracers of armor
 as though they were 
light armor.
Type 
1st; Level
 2; Price 35 gpType 
2nd; Level
 4; Price 95 gpType 
4th; Level
 8; Price 475 gp
Type 
6th; Level
 12; Price 1,900 gpType 
8th; Level
 16; Price 9,400 gp
Type 
10th; Level
 20; Price 65,000 gpBRACERS OF MISSILE DEffectION
 ITEM 
3 Price 60 gpMethod of Use worn, bracers;
 Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation; 
Trigger 
A Invested
MagicalTransmutation
AirConjuration
MagicalAbjuration
Invested
MagicalAbjuration
Invested
Magical384ranged weapon Strike targets you and you aren't flat-footed 
against that attack.
These bracers are made from plates of durable mithral and 
gleam like the summer sun. When you activate the bracers as 
a reaction, you gain a +2 circumstance bonus to AC against the 
triggering attack. Once you activate the bracers, you can't do so 
again for 10 minutes. BREASTPLATE OF COMMAND
 ITEM 
10
Price 960 gpMethod of Use worn, armor;
 Bulk 2 Activation
  Command Activation
This +2 master breastplate 
is made from shining bronze overlaid 
with reinforcing golden panels in the shape of lion's heads. 
Wearing this breastplate grants you a commanding aura. You 
gain a +2 item bonus to Diplomacy checks, but you take a –2 
item penalty to checks to Hide with Stealth or Impersonate 
with Deception. Once per day, you can activate the armor to grant allies within 
100 feet a +2 conditional bonus to saves against fear effects for 
1 minute. When you activate this ability, each afiected ally who's 
frightened reduces their frightened value by 1.
BRONZE BULL PENDANT
 ITEM 
5 Price 18 gpMethod of Use affixed, armor;
 Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You 
attempt to Shove a target, but haven't rolled yet. 
Requirements
 You are an expert in Athletics.
This pendant is forged from grainy steel and depicts a snorting 
bull's face. The pendant must be attached to the breast area or 
on a shoulder guard. When you activate the pendant, you gain a 
+2 conditional bonus to the Athletics check to Shove, and if you 
critically fail the check, treat it as a failure instead. 
BROOCH OF SHIELDING
 ITEM 
2 Price 33 gpMethod of Use worn; 
Bulk —This piece of silver or gold jewelry is adorned with 
miniature images of kite shields and can be used to fasten a 
cloak or cape. The brooch automatically absorbs 
magic missiles targeting you. A 
brooch of shielding
 can absorb 30 individual magic missiles before it melts and becomes useless. Sometimes 
when found, these items have already absorbed a number of 
magic missiles. CANDLE OF REVEALING
 ITEM 
7 Price 40 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk —Activation
  Operate Activation
You can light this deep blue candle to reveal the presence of 
invisible creatures within a 10-foot radius around the candle. 
Such creatures are concealed instead of invisible while within 
this radius. Once lit, the candle burns for 1 minute, at which time 
the efiect ends. If extinguished prematurely, the candle cannot 
be relit.
EnchantmentInvested
MagicalConsumableEvocation
MagicalTrinket
Abjuration
Invested
MagicalConsumableDivination
MagicalCANDLE OF TRUTH
 ITEM 
8 Price 50 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk —Activation
  Operate Activation
This tapered candle has a golden wick that burns 
with white fire when lit. You activate the item by lighting the 
candle, which causes creatures within 10 feet of the candle to 
find it difficult to tell falsehoods. Creatures in the area receive a 
–4 conditional penalty to Lie. In addition, when first entering the afiected area, creatures 
(including you), must succeed at a DC 22 Will save or be unable 
to tell any deliberate and intentional lies while within 10 feet of 
the lit candle. Once lit, the candle burns for 10 minutes, and it cannot be extinguished.
CAPE OF THE MOUNTEBANK
 ITEM 
11
Price 1,300 gpMethod of Use worn, cloak;
 Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
This bright red-and-gold cape is often interlaced with glittery 
threads, and serves as a distraction. While wearing the cape, you 
gain a +3 item bonus to Deception checks. Once per day, you can activate the cape to cast 
dimension 
door. The space you leave and the one you appear in are fllled 
with pufis of smoke that make anyone within concealed until 
they leave the smoke or the end of your next turn, at which 
point the smoke dissipates. Strong winds immediately disperse 
the smoke. CELESTIAL ARMOR
 ITEM 
10
Price 1,000 gpMethod of Use worn, armor;
 Bulk 1 Activation
  Command Activation
This suit of +2 chain mail is made of flne white 
links, and the sleeves and skirt are fashioned into smaller trails 
that resemble feathers. Unlike normal chain mail, 
celestial 
armor has no Speed reduction, its armor check penalty is 0, and 
its Bulk is 1. You appear beautiful and radiant while you wear 
the armor, giving you a +3 item bonus to Diplomacy checks 
against non-flends. You gain a +1 circumstance bonus to AC and saving throws 
against flends. Once per day, you can activate the armor to 
cause it to sprout glowing wings. These grant you a fiy Speed 
of 30 feet and shed bright light in a 40-foot radius. The wings 
fade away after 1 minute.
If you are not good, you are drained 2 while wearing 
celestial armor. You can't recover from this condition while 
wearing the armor.
Craft Requirements
 You must be good.
CHIME OF OPENING
 ITEM 
6 Price 235 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
This hollow mithral tube is about a foot long. You activate this 
item by striking the chime and aiming it at a container, door, or 
ConsumableEnchantmentMagicalMentalConjuration
Invested
MagicalDivineGoodInvested
Transmutation
Evocation
Magical385lock you want to open. The chime sends out magical vibrations 
that replicate a 3rd-level 
knock spell against the target, except 
that instead of allowing you to attempt a Thievery check, the 
chime attempts this check with a Thievery bonus of +13. This 
targets only one lock or binding at a time, so you might need to 
activate the chime multiple times to open a target with several 
forms of protection. The chime can be activated 10 times before 
it cracks and becomes useless. CHOKER OF ELOCUTION
 ITEM 
6+Method of Use worn, collar; 
Bulk LActivation
  Command Activation
This platinum choker bears characters from a 
particular language's alphabet, and fllls you with knowledge of 
that language and the associated culture's customs. You gain 
an item bonus to Society checks and the ability to read, speak, 
and understand the chosen language. Your excellent elocution 
reduces the flat check to perform an auditory action while 
deafened from 5 to 3.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 6; Price 200 gpThe choker grants a +2 item bonus. Type 
greater; 
Level
 13; Price 2,400 gp
The choker grants a +4 item bonus. It bears characters from 
three languages and grants fiuency in all three.
Craft Requirements
 You must know the language or languages 
the choker grants. CIRCLET OF PERSUASION
 ITEM 
14
Price 4,500 gpMethod of Use worn, circlet;
 Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation
This elegant silver band often resembles curling flg 
leaves and fits around your brow. You gain a +3 item bonus to 
Deception and Diplomacy checks. When you invest the circlet, 
you either increase your Charisma score by 2 or increase it to 18, 
whichever would give you a higher score.
You can activate the circlet to cast a 4th-level 
charm spell (DC 31).CLANDESTINE CLOAK
 ITEM 
5+Method of Use worn, cloak; 
Bulk LActivation
  Focus Activation, 
 Operate 
Activation
When you pull up the hood of this gray cloak (an Interact action), 
you become drab and uninteresting, gaining an item bonus 
to Stealth checks and to Deception checks to Impersonate a 
forgettable background character such as a servant, but also 
taking a –2 item penalty to Diplomacy and Intimidation checks.
Once per day, you can activate the cloak to pull the hood up 
and gain the benefits of nondetection for the listed duration or 
until you pull the hood back down, whichever comes first.
Type
 standard; 
Level
 5; Price 150 gpThe cloak grants a +2 bonus. Nondetection is 3rd level and 
lasts for 10 minutes. Type 
greater; 
Level
 13; Price 2,900 gpThe cloak grants a +4 bonus. Nondetection is 7th level and 
lasts for 1 hour.
EnchantmentInvested
MagicalEnchantmentInvested
MagicalPotent
IllusionInvested
MagicalCLIMBING BOLT 
 ITEM 
4 Price 9 gp Ammunition boltThe shaft of this bolt is wrapped with flne twine. 
When the bolt strikes a solid surface, the twine unwinds and 
enlarges into a 50-foot-long hemp rope, securely fastened to the 
surface the bolt struck. The rope can be pulled free with an Interact 
basic action and a successful DC 20 Athletics check. 
CLOAK OF ELVENKIND
 ITEM 
10+Method of Use worn, cloak; 
Bulk LActivation
  Focus Activation, 
 Operate 
Activation
This cloak is deep green with a voluminous hood, and is 
embroidered with gold trim and symbols of signiflcance to the 
elves. The cloak allows you to cast the 
ghost sound cantrip as an innate arcane spell. When you draw the hood up over your 
head (an Interact action), the cloak transforms to match the 
environment around you and mufles your sounds, giving you an 
item bonus to Stealth checks. If you activate the cloak, you pull 
the hood up and are afiected by 
invisibility for 1 minute or until you pull the hood back down, whichever comes first.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 10; Price 1,000 gpThe cloak grants a +3 bonus. Type 
greater; 
Level
 18; Price 24,000 gp
The cloak grants a +5 bonus, and invisibility is 4th level. If 
you're also wearing 
greater boots of elvenkind, the greater cloak 
of elvenkind
 allows you to Sneak in forest environments even 
when creatures are currently observing you.
CLOAK OF THE BAT
 ITEM 
9+Method of Use worn, cloak; 
Bulk LActivation
  Command Activation, 
 Operate 
Activation
Sewn from several long strips of luxurious brown and black silk, 
this cloak grants you an item bonus to Stealth checks as well as to 
Acrobatics checks to Maneuver in Flight. You can also hang from 
any surface that can support your weight using only your feet, 
without any check, though you still must attempt the appropriate 
Athletics check to Climb in order to move around while inverted.
You can activate the cloak to transform it into bat-like wings 
that grant you a fiy Speed of 30 feet for 1 minute, or to cast a 
4th-level 
pest form spell to transform yourself into a Tiny bat.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 9; Price 660 gpThe cloak grants a +2 bonus, and you can activate the cloak 
once per day.
Type 
greater; 
Level
 14; Price 4,000 gpThe cloak grants a +4 bonus, and you can activate the cloak 
any number of times per day.
COLLAR OF INCONSPICUOUSNESS
 ITEM 
9 Price 625 gpMethod of Use worn, collar; 
Bulk 1 Activation
  Focus Activation
This leather collar's worn and almost threadbare look defles its 
magical nature. When you invest the collar and attach it to your 
Conjuration
ConsumableMagicalIllusionInvested
MagicalInvested
MagicalTransmutation
Invested
PrimalTransmutation
386animal companion's neck, it grants you the ability to change 
your ferocious animal companion into a more inconspicuous 
form. While touching your animal companion, you can activate 
the collar to transform your companion into a nonthreatening 
Tiny creature of the same or a similar species (for instance, a 
house cat instead of a tiger or a puppy instead of a wolf). This 
has the effects of pest form (2nd level, or 4th level if your animal 
companion can fiy). The efiect lasts until you dismiss it with 
another Focus Activation action that doesn't cost RP.
COYOTE CLOAK 
 ITEM 
5+Method of Use worn, cloak; 
Bulk —This dusty coat is made of mangy, brown-and-gray 
coyote fur. While you are wearing this cloak, you 
gain an item bonus to Survival checks to Cover Tracks or Survive 
in the Wild. If you critically succeed at your Survival check to 
Survive in the Wild, you can feed three additional people instead 
of just one. Type 
standard; 
Level
 5; Price 125 gpThe cloak grants a +2 bonus. Type 
greater; 
Level
 13; Price 2,500 gpThe cloak grants a +4 bonus, and if you critically succeed at 
Surviving in the Wild, you can feed flve additional people instead 
of just one. CRAFTER'S EYEPIECE 
 ITEM 
5+Method of Use worn, eyepiece; 
Bulk —This rugged metal eyepiece etched with square 
patterns, is designed to be worn over a single eye. 
Twisting the lens reveals a faint three-dimensional outline of an 
item you plan to build, with helpful labels on the component 
parts. While worn, this eyepiece gives you an item bonus to 
Crafting checks to Craft. Type 
standard; 
Level
 5; Price 125 gpThe eyepiece grants a +2 bonus.
Type 
greater; 
Level
 13; Price 2,700 gp
 Activation
 1 minute (Operate Activation)
The eyepiece grants a +4 bonus. Once per day, you can activate 
the eyepiece by twisting it for 1 minute to have the eyepiece 
cast a 5th-level 
creation
 spell over the course of the minute to 
construct a temporary item. DAGGER OF VENOM
 ITEM 
5 Price 160 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
The serrated blade of this 
+1 dagger has a greenish tinge, and the 
pommel is sculpted to look like the head of a serpent about to strike. When you critically succeed at your attack roll with the 
dagger of venom, the target becomes sick 1 unless it succeeds at 
a DC 19 Fortitude save. This is a poison efiect.
Once per day, after you hit a creature with the 
dagger of venom, you can spend your next action to activate the dagger and poison 
the creature you hit.
Dagger Venom 
(poison) Saving Throw
 Fortitude DC 19; 
Maximum 
Duration
 4 rounds. 
Stage 1 1d4 poison damage and enfeebled 1.Divination
Invested
MagicalInvested
MagicalTransmutation
MagicalNecromancy
Poison
DANCING SCARF 
 ITEM 
6+Method of Use worn, belt; 
Bulk—Activation
  Operate Activation
This long and billowing scarf is typically woven of 
silk or another sheer fabric and adorned with bells 
or other jangling bits of shiny metal. It grants an item bonus 
to Performance checks to dance; additionally, after spending 
a Perform action to dance, you can activate the scarf to grant 
yourself concealment until the end of your next turn. 
Type 
standard; 
Level
 6; Price 245 gp
The scarf grants a +2 bonus. Type 
greater; 
Level
 14; Price 4,450 gp
The scarf grants a +4 bonus. When you activate the scarf, the 
squares adjacent to you are considered your space for the purpose 
of determining whether your enemy's attacks are screened.
DAREDEVIL BOOTS
 ITEM 
10+Method of Use worn, shoes;
 Bulk LThese brightly colored boots motivate you to perform 
risky stunts and grant you the agility to succeed. 
The boots grant you an item bonus to Acrobatics check and a 
circumstance bonus to checks to Tumble Through an enemy's space.
The boots can grip solid surfaces and help you avoid a fall, 
allowing you to use the Grab Edge reaction even if your hands 
aren't free. You treat falls as 10 feet shorter or, if you have the 
Cat Fall feat, treat your proficiency rank in Acrobatics as one rank 
better to determine the benefits of that feat. If you have Cat Fall 
and are already legendary in Acrobatics, you can choose the speed 
of your fall, from 60 feet per round up to normal falling speed.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 10; Price 900 gpThe boots grant a +3 bonus to Acrobatics checks and a +1 bonus 
to Tumble Through.
Type 
greater; 
Level
 17; Price 14,000 gp; Activation
  Focus 
Activation, 
 Operate Activation
The boots grant a +5 bonus to Acrobatics checks and a +2 bonus 
to Tumble Through. You can activate the boots to cast 
freedom of 
movement
 on yourself.
DAZING TREMBLANT
 ITEM 
12 Price 225 gpMethod of Use affixed, weapon;
 Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You deal 
sneak attack damage with the affixed weapon.
A dazing tremblant reverberates every time its affixed weapon 
deals damage. When you activate the tremblant, the damaged 
creature must succeed at a DC 28 Will save or become slow 1 
until the end of your next turn. If it critically fails its saving throw, 
it instead becomes stunned until the end of your next turn.
DEMON ARMOR
 ITEM 
10 Price 1,000 gpMethod of Use worn, armor;
 Bulk 4 Activation
  Command Activation
Crafted from black iron, this crude suit of 
+2 full plate is designed to make you look like a horned demon, with 
your face peering out of the screaming maw of the beast.
IllusionInvested
MagicalVisualAbjuration
Invested
MagicalConsumableEnchantmentMagicalTrinket
DivineEvil
Invested
Necromancy
387 While wearing the armor, you can attack with the helmet's horns. 
They are a 
+1 martial weapon
 that have a d8 damage die, deal 
piercing damage, and have the deadly trait. On a critical hit with the 
horns, the victim must attempt a DC 25 Fortitude save or contract 
the Abyssal plague
 disease (see Abyssal plague
 on page 203).Once per day, you can activate the armor to cast 
dimension door. If you are not evil, you are drained 2 while wearing 
demon armor. You can't recover from this condition while wearing the armor.
Craft Requirements
 You must be evil and supply a casting of 
dimension door. DEMON MASK
 ITEM 
6+
Method of Use worn, mask; 
Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
This terrifying mask is crafted in the visage of a 
leering demon and grants an item bonus to Intimidation checks. 
You can activate the mask once per day to have the mask cast a 
fear spell that implants images of demonic horror.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 6; Price 230 gpThis blood-red mask grants a +2 bonus. It casts 1st-level 
fear with a DC of 20.Type 
greater; 
Level
 14; Price 4,100 gp
This grotesque green mask grants a +4 bonus. It casts 3rd-level 
fear with a DC of 31.DIADEM OF INTELLECT
 ITEM 
14
Price 4,500 Method of Use worn, circlet; 
Bulk LActivation
  Focus Activation
This elegant, colorful gem is cut into a complex 
geometric patter and slotted into a narrow metal band that fits 
around your brow. You gain a +3 item bonus to checks to Recall 
Knowledge, regardless of the skill. When you invest the headband, 
you either increase your Intelligence score by 2 or increase it to 
18, whichever would give you a higher score.
You can activate the diadem to gain the efiect of 
hypercognition
. DISINTEGRATION BOLT
 ITEM 
15 Price 800 gpAmmunition boltActivation
  Operate Activation
The shaft of this bolt is utterly scorched and blackened, and 
handling it leaves a flne black powder coating your flngers. 
When an activated 
disintegration bolt
 hits a creature, in addition 
to the normal damage, the target is subject to a 
disintegrate
 spell requiring a DC 32 Fortitude saving throw. As with the spell, a 
critical hit on the attack roll causes the target's saving throw 
outcome to be one degree worse.
Craft Requirements
 Supply a casting of disintegrate.
DIVINE PRAYER BEADS
 ITEM 
5+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk —Activation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)This strand of ordinary-looking prayer beads 
glows with a soft light and becomes warm to the 
touch the first time you cast a divine spell while holding them. 
EnchantmentInvested
MagicalDivination 
Invested
MagicalPotent
ConsumableEvocation
MagicalDivineHealingNecromancy
Positive
When you do, the prayer beads become attuned to your deity, 
changing their form and iconography to prominently incorporate 
your deity's holy symbol.
Whenever you cast a divine spell from your own spell slots 
(not a cantrip, an innate spell, a power, or any spell cast through 
other means) and you use the prayer beads as your holy symbol, 
you recover 1 Hit Point; this is a positive healing efiect. If the 
spell you cast was a healing spell, you can give this additional 
healing efiect to one of the spell's targets instead of yourself.
Additionally, you can activate the beads to cast 
bless and heal each once per day.
Greater divine prayer beads 
cause you to recover 1d4 HP 
instead of 1 HP when casting divine spells, and activating them 
allows you to cast 
bless, divine wrath
 (matching one component 
of your deity's alignment), 
heal, neutralize poison, and remove 
disease, all as 4th-level spells, each once per day.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 5; Price 160 gpType 
greater; 
Level
 11; Price 1,400 gp
Craft Requirements
 You must be a divine spellcaster.
DOCTOR'S MARVELOUS MEDICINE
 ITEM 
12+Method of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk 1 Activation
  Treat Poison or 8 hours (Treat Disease)
This set of master healer's tools contains a seemingly endless 
supply of bandages, herbs, and other healing items, granting you 
an item bonus to Medicine checks. You can activate the tools when 
you use them to Treat Poison to gain the effects of 
neutralize poison, or when you Treat Disease to gain the effects of 
remove disease
.Type 
standard; 
Level
 12; Price 1,800 gpThe tools grant a +3 item bonus and cast 3rd-level spells.
Type 
greater; 
Level
 18; Price 21,000 gpThe tools grant a +5 item bonus and cast 6th-level spells.
DOUBLING RINGS
 ITEM 
3+
Method of Use worn; 
Bulk —This item consists of two magically linked rings: an 
ornate golden ring with a square-cut ruby, and a 
thick, plain iron ring. When you wield a melee weapon in the hand 
that wears the golden ring, it replicates the power of its potency 
rune onto a melee weapon you wield in the hand wearing the iron 
ring. Any potency rune on the weapon in the iron-ringed hand 
is suppressed. This functions only if you wear both rings, and 
only if the weapon in the iron-ringed hand is of sufficient quality 
to receive the runes. (For instance, it would need to be master 
quality or better to accept a +3 magic weapon 
potency rune.)The replication ceases as soon as you cease wielding a weapon 
in one of your hands. Consequently, the benefit doesn't apply to 
thrown attacks or if you're holding a weapon but not wielding 
it (such as holding a weapon that requires two hands to wield).
Type 
standard; 
Level
 3; Price 50 gpType 
greater; 
Level
 11; Price 1,300 gpThe rings also replicate weapon property runes from the 
weapon in the gold-ringed hand, if the weapon has sufficient 
quality to accept them. The weapon in the iron-ringed hand 
gains the benefits of those runes and its own runes (if any) are 
suppressed. When you invest the rings, you can elect for the 
MagicalNecromancy
Evocation
Invested
Magical388rings to transfer only potency runes, in which case they function 
as standard 
doubling rings. DRAGON'S BREATH POTION
 ITEM 
7+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
This liquid contains blood from a certain breed 
of dragon. For 1 hour after you imbibe the acrid 
concoction, you can unleash a breath weapon used by that breed 
of dragon. The potion's level and Price, as well as the amount of 
damage and the DC of the saving throw, all depend on the age 
of the dragon whose blood you used. This item has the trait 
matching the damage type of the breath weapon.
You can spend another Operate Activation action with no 
RP cost immediately after drinking the potion to exhale dragon 
breath. At any point during the potion's duration, you can use the 
breath weapon by spending 1 RP and 2 Operate Activation actions 
(one to inhale the necessary air and the other to breathe out). After 
you use the breath weapon, you can't do so again for 1d4 rounds.
Each creature in the area of the breath weapon attempts a save 
against your breath weapon.
Success Half damage. Critical Success No damage. Failure
 full damage. Critical Failure
 double damage. Type 
young; 
Level
 7; Price 45 gp; Damage 4d6; DC 21 Type 
adult; Level
 12; Price 250 gp; Damage 7d6; 
DC 28 Type 
wyrm; Level
 17; Price 2,000 gp; Damage 10d6; DC 35 DragonBreath Weapon (Save)
Black or copper30-foot line of acid (Reflex)
Blue or bronze
30-foot line of electricity (Reflex)
Brass30-foot line of fire (Reflex)
Green
15-foot cone of poison (Fortitude)
Gold or red
15-foot cone of fire (Reflex)
Silver or white
15-foot cone of cold (Reflex)
DRAGONSLAYER'S SHIELD
 ITEM 
9 Price 670 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 While raised, this master-quality heavy steel shield (Hardness 
8) grants its circumstance bonus to Reflex saves against area 
effects (as well as to AC and TAC as normal). 
While you hold the shield, it also grants you a +1 circumstance 
bonus to Will saves against a dragon's frightful presence 
ability. Each 
dragonslayer's shield
 is covered with scales from 
a dragon. The shield has resistance 5 against the damage type 
corresponding to that dragon's breath weapon: acid for black or 
copper; cold for silver or white; electricity for blue or bronze; fire 
for brass, gold, or red; or poison for green. You can use Shield 
Block against attacks that deal damage of that type.
DRUID'S VESTMENTS
 ITEM 
10 Price 1,000 gpMethod of Use worn, garment; 
Bulk LActivation
  Command Activation
ConsumableEvocation
MagicalPotion
Abjuration
MagicalInvested
PrimalTransmutation
This brown-and-green tunic is embroidered with patterns that 
resemble interlocking elk antlers. When you transform into a 
battle form using your Wild Shape pool, you can activate the 
vestments to retain your own attack bonus, skill bonuses, and 
AC instead of using those listed in the spell. 
Craft Requirements
 You must have the Wild Shape class feat.
DUST OF APPEARANCE
 ITEM 
5 Price 18 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk —Activation
  Operate Activation
Stored in a small wooden tube or reed, this powder looks like 
a flne metallic dust. When fiung in the air, this dust coats all 
creatures in a 10-foot burst centered on the corner of any space 
within 5 feet of you. For 1 minute, the coated creatures can't be 
concealed or invisible, nor can they benefit from 
mirror image
 or similar abilities that create illusory duplicates. Any illusions in 
the area of 3rd level or lower are revealed as such, although this 
does not end their efiect. DUST OF DISAPPEARANCE
 ITEM 
9 Price 88 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk —Activation
  Operate Activation
This powder shimmers like a thousand tiny motes of light. 
Activating the dust by sprinkling it on yourself or a creature 
within reach casts a 4th-level 
invisibility spell with a duration 
of 1 minute. This invisibility can't be negated or seen through 
by any spell of 3rd level or lower, but it can be foiled by 
dust of appearance
.DWARVEN THROWER
 ITEM 
13 Price 3,000 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1THis +2 master warhammer 
is inlaid with precious metals and 
decorated in a dwarven style. If you're a dwarf, a 
dwarven 
thrower
 functions for you as a master-quality 
+3 returning 
warhammer
 with the thrown 30 feet trait, and your attacks with 
the hammer deal an additional 1d8 damage against giants. EFFERVESCENT AMPOULE
 ITEM 
7 Price 42 gpMethod of Use affixed, armor;
 Bulk —Activation 
 Operate Activation
 Requirements
 You are an expert in Acrobatics.
Light spring water flzzes and bubbles within this small glass 
globe. When you activate the trinket, you decant the spring 
water onto the affixed armor. Until the end of your turn, the 
armor lets you move across water and other liquids as if they 
were solid ground. If you Stride or Step over a weight-sensitive 
pressure plate, you don't cause the plate to depress, which 
prevents you from triggering any device or hazard attached to 
the pressure plate.
When the ampoule's efiect ends, you sink, fall, break through 
fiimsy ground, or land on pressure plates as normal for your 
current location.
ConsumableDivination
MagicalConsumableIllusionMagicalEvocation
MagicalConsumableMagicalTransmutation
Trinket
389 ELECTRIC EELSKIN
 ITEM 
10 Price 950 gpMethod of Use worn, armor;
 Bulk 1 Activation
  Command Activation, 
 Operate 
Activation
Shining, slippery eelskin makes up the plates of this 
+2 master slick 
leather armor. The armor gives you the ability to breathe water 
and grants you a +3 item bonus to Athletics checks to Swim and 
Stealth checks. In addition, you can activate the armor to cast 
shocking grasp
 (2nd level). 
Craft Requirements
 Supply a casting of shocking grasp.
ELEMENTAL GEM
 ITEM 
10 Price 120 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk —Activation
  Command Activation, 
 Operate 
Activation
You shout the name of an Elemental Lord and dash this glassy gem 
against a hard surface to activate it. It cracks open, casting a 5th-
level 
summon monster spell to summon forth a lesser elemental 
that's under your control as long as you spend an action each 
round to Concentrate on a Spell. 
This gem comes in four varieties: transparent for an air 
elemental, light brown for an earth elemental, reddish orange for 
a fire elemental, and blue-green for a water elemental.
EMERALD GRASSHOPPER
 ITEM 
10 Price 115 gpMethod of Use affixed, armor;
 Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You 
attempt a High Jump, but haven't rolled yet.
Requirements
 You are a master in Athletics.
This small emerald grasshopper is usually clasped to the legs of a suit of armor. When you activate the grasshopper, if you succeed 
at the Athletics check, you leap up to 50 feet vertically and up to 
10 feet horizontally. If you critically succeed, you can leap up to 
75 feet vertically and 20 feet horizontally. If you don't end your 
jump on solid ground, you fiutter in the air until the end of your 
turn and then fall harmlessly at a rate of 60 feet per round.
EVERBURNING TORCH
 ITEM 
2 Price 25 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hands; Bulk LThis torch sheds light constantly, requiring no 
oxygen and generating no heat. The flame can be covered or 
hidden, but not smothered or quenched.
EXPLOSIVE AMMUNITION
 ITEM 
8+
Ammunition anyActivation
  Operate Activation
This piece of ammunition is coated in gritty black 
soot. When activated 
explosive ammunition
 hits a creature, the missile explodes in a 10-foot burst that deals an 
amount of fire damage depending on the ammunition's type. 
Each creature in the area must attempt a Reflex save.
Success Half damage. Invested
MagicalTransmutation
Conjuration
ConsumableMagicalConsumableMagicalTransmutation
Trinket
Evocation
LightMagicalConsumableEvocation
Fire
MagicalCritical Success No damage. Failure
 Full damage. Critical Failure
 Double damage. Type 
standard; 
Level
 8; Price 60 gp; Damage 6d6; DC 22 Type 
greater; 
Level
 12; Price 250 gp; Damage 10d6; DC 28 EYES OF THE EAGLE
 ITEM 
6 Price 250 gpMethod of Use worn, eyepiece; 
Bulk —These lenses of amber crystal fit over your eyes. 
They grant you low-light vision and a +2 item bonus to Perception 
checks that involve sight.
FEAR GEM
 ITEM 
4 Price 11 gpMethod of Use affixed, weapon;
 Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You use 
Intimidating Strike, but haven't rolled for the 
attack yet.
Dark smoke seems to writhe within this obsidian 
gem. When you activate the gem, if your Intimidating Strike hits, 
the target is frightened 2 and flat-footed against your attacks until 
the end of your next turn. If the attack roll is a critical success, the 
target is flat-footed against your attacks for 1 minute. FEATHER STEP STONE
 ITEM 
3 Price 6 gpMethod of Use affixed, armor;
 Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You take a 
Stride or Step action. Requirement
 You are an expert in Acrobatics.
This stone, usually set in a cameo, is a small chunk of yellow or 
blue amber with a bit of feather or a fiying insect caught within 
it. When you activate the stone, you ignore the effects of difficult 
terrain on the ground while performing the triggering action. FEATHER TOKEN
 ITEM 
1+Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk —Activation
  Operate Activation
Each feather token
 appears to be a simple feather 
from some exotic bird. The feather's shaft, dipped in gold, bears a 
single arcane rune. Activating a feather token causes the feather 
to transform into another object, which then can be used as normal. Each feather can be activated only once, with most of 
them permanently becoming the item in their description. Type
 anchor; Level
 7; Price 45 gpThis feather can be activated only on a boat. When used, 
this feather turns into a massive anchor that causes the boat 
to immediately stop. After 1 day, the anchor vanishes and the 
boat can move as normal. The anchor is attached to the boat by 
a magical chain of force, but it can be removed by 
dispel magic or a similar efiect. Type 
bird; 
Level
 1; Price 2 gpWhen used, this token transforms into a small sparrow that 
waits on your flnger for you to relay a message up to 1 minute in 
duration, along with the name and rough location of a
 recipient. 
Invested
MagicalTransmutation
ConsumableEnchantmentFear
MagicalMentalTrinket
ConsumableMagicalTransmutation
Trinket
Conjuration
ConsumableMagical390
The recipient must be someone you have met, and the location 
must be somewhere you have visited. After receiving the 
message, the bird fiies ofi to deliver it, traveling at 30 miles 
per hour and then searching for the target in the location you 
provided. If the bird finds the target, it moves adjacent to them, 
your words emanate from the bird, then the bird fiies ofi and 
vanishes. The bird also vanishes if it fails to find your target after 
10 hours of searching the location you specifled.
Type 
chest; Level
 3; Price 7 gpWhen you use this token, a small wooden chest appears and 
immediately opens. This chest can hold up to 10 Bulk worth of 
items. Once the chest is closed, it transforms again—this time into 
a key—taking all of the stored items with it. You can activate this 
key by spending an Interact action to turn it in an imaginary lock, 
which causes it to transform back into a chest with all of the items still inside. Once it has turned into a chest a second time, it will forever remain a wooden chest.
Type 
fan; Level
 4; Price 12 gpActivating this feather requires you to fan it in a given 
direction. If this direction is toward the sail of a boat, the boat is 
accelerated 10 for up to 8 hours. If fanned in any other direction, 
it instead casts gust of wind (DC 17).Type
 holly bush; Level
 2; Price 5 gpWhen this feather is activated, it immediately transforms into 
a living holly bush, fllling a single square. This bush can provide 
cover. In addition, the bush has 2d4 bright red berries. While 
holly berries are usually poisonous, these berries are infused 
with beneflcial magic. You can eat a berry as an Interact action to 
recover 1 Hit Point. Once plucked from the bush, a berry becomes 
nonmagical after a few seconds, so it doesn't heal you if you 
don't eat it within the span of your Interact action.
If activated on soil, the plant continues to grow and thrive 
(although it will not produce any more healing berries). If 
activated elsewhere, it withers and dies within 1d4 days.
Type
 ladder; Level
 1; Price 2 gpWhen activated, this token transforms into a 20-foot-long 
wooden ladder.
Type
 swan boat; 
Level 
8; Price 54 gpThis feather can be activated only when tossed into a large 
body of water, such as a lake or broad river. It transforms into a 
swan-shaped boat capable of carrying up to 32 Medium creatures 
or 8 Large creatures. The boat moves on the water at a Speed of 
60 feet, and it lasts for 1 day.
Type
 tree; 
Level 
6; Price 26 gpThis token can be used only on an unoccupied patch of earth 
or soil. When activated, this token transforms into an oak tree, 
60 feet tall with a 5-foot-wide trunk. The tree continues to live 
and grow if conditions are favorable.
Type
 whip; Level 
9; Price 90 gpThis feather transforms into a 
+1 dancing whip. The whip immediately jumps from your grasp and continues to attack 
your enemies until 1 minute has passed or it fails its flat check 
for dancing, at which point it vanishes. If the whip's target isn't 
prone, it uses its actions to attempt to Trip that creature. Its 
attack bonus is +18 instead of the normal bonus for a 
dancing weapon, and it uses the same bonus for its Trip attempts. 
FIGHTER'S FORK 
 ITEM 
5 Price 150 gpMethod of Use held, 1 or 2 hands; Bulk 1 You can manipulate this 
+1 trident with an Interact action to extend or shorten the haft. When extended, the trident requires 
two hands to wield and gains the reach trait, but loses the 
trident's normal thrown trait.
FLAME TONGUE
 ITEM 
10+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1THis longsword has an ornate brass hilt and a 
pommel and blade shaped like stylized flames. 
When wielded, the blade reflects shimmering firelight, emitting 
dim light in a 10-foot radius. While wielding the sword, you can 
cast the produce flame
 cantrip as an innate arcane spell.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 10; Price 1,000 gpThis is a +2 master flaming longsword
. When casting produce 
flame, you treat your spellcasting ability modifier as +6.
Type 
greater; 
Level
 16; Price 9,000 gp; Activation
  CommandThis is a +3 master greater flaming longsword
. When casting 
produce flame, you treat your spellcasting ability modifier as +6. 
Once per day while wielding the sword, you can activate it to 
create a 10-foot aura of flame that lasts 1 minute. Your attacks, 
as well as the attacks of allies who are within the aura, gain the 
flaming property.
FLOATING SHIELD 
 ITEM 
13
 Price 2,800 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
This master-quality light wooden shield (Hardness 6) protects 
you without requiring you to spend actions each round. When 
you activate this shield, you can release it from your grip as 
a part of that action. The shield fioats in the air next to you, 
granting you its bonus automatically, as if you Raised the Shield. 
Because you're not wielding the shield, you can't use reactions 
such as Shield Block with the shield. After 1 minute, the shield drops to the ground, ending its 
fioating efiect. While the shield is adjacent to you, you can grasp 
it with an Interact action, ending its fioating efiect.
FORGE WARDEN
 ITEM 
9 Price 690 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation 
 Command Activation; 
Trigger 
You use the 
forge 
warden 
for Shield Block and the shield takes 1 Dent. The holy symbol of the forge god Torag—an ornate hammer of 
flne dwarven construction—adorns the face of this expert-quality 
heavy steel shield (Hardness 6). While you're wielding this shield, 
you count as having a religious symbol of Torag in your hand.
You and any adjacent allies have fire resistance 5 while the 
shield is raised. When used for a Shield Block, the forge warden
 rings out like the hammer strike of a blacksmith, and the symbol 
glows as if lit by the fires of a furnace; if the 
forge warden
 takes a Dent and the attacking creature is adjacent to you, you can 
activate the shield to deal the attacking creature 4d6 fire damage.
MagicalTransmutation
Evocation
Fire
MagicalMagicalAbjuration
Magical391 BELT OF
THE FIVE
KINGSRING OF THE RAM
POSSIBILITY TOME
GALLOWS
TOOTH
BROOCH OF SHIELDING
ROBE OF EYES
IRON MEDALLION
MARKETS FOR MAGIC
Magic, like any commodity, functions under the rules of supply and demand. 
When the players demand items, it is up to the GM to supply them. 
During downtime, consider providing markets that specialize in magic 
items. Such markets can come in a variety of forms, from a wandering 
stranger with a few potions and maybe a silver dagger, to a large trading 
house or auction in the heart of a major city selling items from around the 
world and even beyond. Markets can be represented as simply as a list 
given during downtime, or a rarity and level limit based on the size of the 
settlement, but they're most memorable when they have character. 
For instance, Captain Coltan Menedrid's magic market is his ship. He 
buys, trades, and sells items at one port and moves on to the next. While 
he specializes in nautical items and trinkets, he often has a surprisingly 
eclectic selection of magic items, though the supplies are limited.
392 GALLOWS TOOTH 
 ITEM 
9 Price 88 gpMethod of Use affixed, weapon;
 Bulk —Activation
  Operate Activation; 
Trigger
 You 
start your turn adjacent to at least one creature.
Requirements
 You have the deny advantage class feature.
This grisly molar hangs from a cord threaded through a tiny hole 
just above its dried, exposed root. When you break this trinket, 
creatures that are currently adjacent to you are flat-footed to 
you until the end of your turn.
GHOST AMMUNITION 
 ITEM 
14
Ammunition any Price 550 gpThis ammunition gains the effects of the ghost touch
 property 
and can fiy through any obstacle except those that can block 
incorporeal creatures or effects. You still must have sensed your 
target (or be able to see it with x-ray vision or a similar ability) in 
order to target it. Though the ammunition penetrates barriers and 
ignores cover, the target still benefits from the flat check from 
being concealed or sensed and the attack is against AC, not TAC.
After it is fired, the ammunition vanishes into mist. However, in 
the dead of the night 1d4 days later, it reappears in the last quiver 
or other container it was taken from. 
Ghost ammunition can be 
only a basic piece of ammunition; it can never be ammunition made 
of a special material or with any other special traits or qualities.
GHOST DUST
 ITEM 
15 Price 750 gpMethod of Use affixed, armor; Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You attempt 
a Stealth check to Hide, but haven't rolled yet.
Requirements
 You are legendary in Stealth.
This small vial is fllled with a grayish-green dust rendered from 
dried ectoplasm. When you activate the dust, it casts an 8th-level 
invisibility spell on you with a duration of 1 minute.
GHOUL HIDE
 ITEM 
5 Price 140 gpMethod of Use worn, armor; 
Bulk 2STitched together from pieces of ghoul skin, this 
suit of +1 hide grants you a +1 item bonus to saving throws against 
disease and paralysis, and it makes you immune to the paralysis 
of ghouls, ghasts, and lacedons. Ghoul hide reviles the touch of 
elves. When worn by an elf or a half-elf, it gains the clumsy trait.
GLOOM BLADE
 ITEM 
9 Price 700 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LAs black as coal, this master-quality shortsword grows more 
potent in the darkness. While in bright light, it functions as a 
master-quality weapon and doesn't appear to radiate a magic 
aura to detect magic or similar spells unless they're 4th level or 
higher. In dim light or darkness, the gloom blade becomes a 
+2 
master shortsword
. Whenever you use your 
gloom blade 
to attack 
a creature you're unseen by, you deal 1d6 extra precision damage.
ConsumableDivination
MagicalTrinket
MagicalTransmutation
ConsumableIllusionOccultTrinket
Invested
MagicalNecromancy
Evocation
MagicalGLOVES OF STORING
 ITEM 
7 Price 340 gpMethod of Use worn, gloves;
 Bulk —Activation
  Operate Activation
When you activate these supple leather gloves, 
you cause any one item you're holding with a Bulk of 1 or less 
to vanish, appearing as a simple, stitched pattern on the back 
of each glove. If you have a free hand, you can make that item 
appear in that hand as a free action triggered when your turn 
begins or when you complete an action.
GOGGLES OF NIGHT
 ITEM 
6+
Method of Use worn, eyepiece; 
Bulk —Activation
  Operate Activation
The opaque crystal lenses of these sleek goggles 
do not obscure vision, but rather enhance it. While wearing the 
goggles, you gain an item bonus to Perception checks involving 
sight. Activating these goggles by rotating the lenses 90 
degrees allows you to see with darkvision.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 6; Price 220 gpThe goggles grant a +2 bonus, and the darkvision lasts for 
10 minutes. Type 
greater; 
Level
 10; Price 900 gpThe goggles grant a +3 bonus. The darkvision lasts until you 
rotate the lenses back or the item is no longer invested by you, 
whichever comes first.
GORGET OF THE PRIMAL ROAR
 ITEM 
11 Price 1,250 gpMethod of Use worn, collar; 
Bulk LActivation
  Command Activation
This simple darkwood gorget seems to vibrate with ferocity, 
granting you a +3 item bonus to Intimidation checks. When 
you're in a non-humanoid form via a polymorph efiect, you can 
activate the gorget to unleash a bestial roar, attempting a single 
Intimidation check compared to the Will DCs of enemies within 
30 feet to impose the effects below. You can do this only once per 
polymorph. You can provide this Command Activation without the 
need for language. Success The target is frightened 1.Critical Success The target is frightened 2 and fieeing for 1 round.
Failure
 No efiect. GRIM TROPHY
 ITEM 
6 Price 30 gpMethod of Use affixed, armor;
 Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You 
attempt an Intimidation check to Coerce or 
Demoralize, but haven't rolled yet.
Requirements
 You are an expert in Intimidation.
This trinket comes in many forms, but it is nearly always 
a severed piece of a humanoid creature displayed in some 
gruesome manner. When you activate the trophy, select two 
targets and compare your Intimidation check result to both of 
their DCs. If you are Coercing, the second target must have been 
present for the minute of conversation.
ExtradimensionalInvested
MagicalTransmutation
Invested
Magical 
Transmutation
EnchantmentInvested
PrimalConsumableEnchantmentMagicalTrinket
393 HAND OF THE MAGE 
 ITEM 
2 Price 30 gpMethod of Use worn; 
Bulk LThis mummifled elf hand hangs on a golden chain, 
its gnarled flngers locked in a peculiar pattern. It allows you to 
cast mage hand as an innate arcane cantrip.
HANDWRAPS OF MIGHTY FISTS
 ITEM 
2+
Method of Use worn, gloves; 
Bulk —When you invest these simple sheets of cloth, you 
must meditate and slowly wrap them around your 
hands. The handwraps can have weapon runes placed into them 
to give your unarmed attacks the benefits of those runes, making 
your unarmed attacks work like 
magic weapons
. For example, 
+2 handwraps of mighty fists
 would give you a +2 item bonus 
to attack rolls and grant two additional weapon damage dice on 
your unarmed attacks. Normally this means you would deal 3d4 
damage instead of 1d4 with your flsts, but if your flsts have a 
different weapon damage die or you have other unarmed attacks, 
use their weapon damage dice instead.
When determining which property runes handwraps can gain, 
treat them as melee weapons of the brawling group with light 
Bulk. Property runes apply only if they would be appropriate 
for the type of attack you're using. For example, a property that 
must be applied to a slashing weapon wouldn't function when 
you attacked with a flst, but it would work if you attacked with 
claws or some other slashing unarmed attack.
The entries below list both the base handwraps of difiering 
quality with no potency runes, as well as entries for each 
handwrap with only a potency rune and no property runes. As 
with magic weapons, these assume the minimum quality level, 
so the +2 handwraps
 are of expert quality, for instance. You can 
upgrade their quality and add or transfer runes just like you 
could with weapons.
Type 
expert; 
Level
 2; Price 35 gpType 
+1; Level
 4; Price 100 gpType 
master; Level
 7; Price 360 gpType 
+2; Level
 8; Price 500 gpType 
+3; Level
 12; Price 2,000 gpType 
legendary; Level
 15; Price 6,500 gpType 
+4; Level
 16; Price 10,000 gpType 
+5; Level
 20; Price 70,000 gpHAT OF DISGUISE
 ITEM 
2+
Method of Use worn, headwear; 
Bulk —Activation
 1 minute (Operate Activation)
This ordinary-looking hat can be activated to cast 
a 1st-level
 illusory disguise spell on yourself. While setting up 
the disguise, you can also alter the hat to appear as a comb, 
ribbon, helm, or other piece of headwear.
Type
 standard; 
Level
 2; Price 30 gpType 
greater; 
Level
 6; Price 215 gp; Activation
  Operate 
Activation
Once per day, you can spend 2 Operate Activation actions 
on the hat to cast 2nd-level 
illusory disguise on yourself to 
create a superior disguise.
Evocation
Invested
MagicalInvested
Magical 
Transmutation
IllusionInvested
MagicalHAT OF THE MAGI 
 ITEM 
5+
Method of Use worn, headwear;
 Bulk —This hat comes in a variety of forms, such as a 
colorful, ornate turban or a pointy hat with a brim, 
sometimes covered with astrological symbols or arcane runes. It 
grants you an item bonus to Arcana checks, and allows you to 
cast the prestidigitation
 cantrip as an innate arcane spell. 
Type 
standard; 
Level
 5; Price 150 gpThe hat grants a +2 bonus.
Type 
greater; 
Level
 14; Price 4,200 gp; Activation
 spellcasting actions of the chosen spell, 1 Resonance Point
The hat grants a +4 bonus, and it can be activated once per 
day to cast a 6th-level 
summon monster arcane spell.
HEADBAND OF INSPIRED WISDOM
 ITEM 
14
Price 4,500 gpMethod of Use worn, circlet; 
Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation or 
 Focus 
Activation; 
Trigger 
You fail a saving throw against 
an efiect that makes you confused, fascinated, or stupefled.
This simple cloth headband remains pristine and clean at all times 
no matter the circumstances. When you invest the headband, 
you either increase your Wisdom score by 2 or increase it to 18, 
whichever would give you a higher score.
When you are considering a course of action, you can activate 
the headband of inspired wisdom
 as an action to get a gut feeling about whether it's a good idea. You gain the effects of an 
augury spell, except that you receive the result from your own instincts 
rather than an external source.
When you activate the 
headband of inspired wisdom
 as a reaction, it clears your mind. You can reroll the saving throw and 
use the second result. This is a fortune efiect. 
HEALER'S GLOVES
 ITEM 
7+
Method of Use worn, gloves;
 Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
These clean, white gloves never show signs of 
blood, even when used to stitch up wounds or treat other 
ailments. They give you an item bonus to Medicine checks. In 
addition, once per day you can activate the item to soothe a 
willing, adjacent creature's wounds, restoring a certain number 
of HP to that creature. You can't harm undead with this healing.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 7; Price 340 gpThe gloves provide a +2 bonus and restore 3d8+3 HP.
Type 
greater; 
Level
 15; Price 6,000 gpThe gloves provide a +4 bonus and restore 11d8+5 HP.
HEALING POTION
 ITEM 
1+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
When you drink a 
healing potion, you regain the 
listed number of Hit Points.
Type 
minor; Level
 1; Price 3 gpThe potion restores 1d8 Hit Points.
Type 
lesser; Level
 3; Price 8 gpThe potion restores 2d8+4 Hit Points.
Arcane
Conjuration
Invested
Abjuration 
Invested 
Magical 
Potent
Invested
Magical 
Necromancy
Consumable 
HealingMagical 
Necromancy 
Potion
394 Type 
moderate; 
Level
 5; Price 20 gpThe potion restores 3d8+8 Hit Points.
Type 
greater; 
Level
 8; Price 60 gpThe potion restores 5d8+12 Hit Points.
Type 
major; Level
 12; Price 250 gpThe potion restores 7d8+20 Hit Points.
Type 
true; Level
 16; Price 1,200 gpThe potion restores 9d8+30 Hit Points.
HOLY AVENGER
 ITEM 
14
Price 4,500 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation
  Command Activation
The gleaming holy avenger
 is the iconic weapon of powerful 
paladins. The crossbar and hilt of this 
+3 cold iron longsword
 are 
styled to look like angel wings. Tradition holds that those who 
see their reflection in a 
holy avenger's
 highly polished blade have 
their faults laid bare.
When you activate the sword, you can use a separate Interact 
action to point it at a creature you can see. You learn if that 
creature is evil; this is a 2nd-level divination and detection spell. 
A non-good creature attempting to wield a 
holy avenger
 is enfeebled 2. This condition can't be removed in any way until the 
creature removes the weapon from its person.
If you're a paladin, you also gain the following two benefits.

Ł When you critically hit an evil creature with the 
holy avenger, the creature is slowed 1 and enfeebled 2 for 1 round.

Ł After you hit a creature with the 
holy avenger, you can spend 
your next action to activate the sword to cast 
dispel magic at 
the same level as your champion powers. This 
dispel magic 
can target either an illusion the creature created or a mental efiect 
the creature cast on you or one of your allies. You must be 
within 120 feet of the illusion or ally to dispel the efiect. Once per day, you can use this 
dispel magic to instead target a spell afiecting the creature you hit or an item that creature wears 
or carries. Craft Requirements
 You must be a lawful good paladin and supply 
detect alignment and 
dispel magic. The initial raw materials must 
include 250 gp of cold iron.
HOLY WATER
 ITEM 
1 Price 2 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LThis vial contains water blessed by a good deity. 
You activate a vial of holy water by throwing it as a 
Strike with a range of 20 feet; this doesn't require an expenditure 
of Resonance Points. Holy water deals 1d6 good damage and 
1 good splash damage. Holy water damages only creatures that 
have a weakness to good damage, as well as all flends and undead.
HORN OF BLASTING
 ITEM 
9 Price 700 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation or 
 Operate Activation
A horn of blasting looks like a master-quality brass trumpet, and 
you can use it as such for Performance as normal. When you 
DivineEvocation
GoodConsumableDivineGoodSplashEvocation
Sonicactivate the horn by blowing into it with destructive intent, you 
create a blast note targeting one creature or object within 30 feet. 
The target takes 4d6 sonic damage, and can attempt a DC 23 
Fortitude save for half damage (no damage on a critical success).
Once per day, you can blow even louder, spending 2 Operate 
Activation actions to instead create an intense blast wave that 
deals 8d6 sonic damage to creatures in a 30-foot cone and causes 
them to be deafened for 2d6 rounds. A target can attempt a DC 23 
Fortitude saving throw; on a success it takes half damage (or no 
damage on a critical success) and negates the deafened condition.
HORSESHOES OF SPEED
 ITEM 
7+
Method of Use worn, horseshoes; 
Bulk 1 When you invest these four simple iron horseshoes 
and affix them to the hooves of an ordinary horse 
or a quadrupedal animal companion, that creature gains an item 
bonus to its land Speed and to Athletics checks to High Jump or 
Long Jump. In addition, when it Leaps, it can move 5 feet further 
if jumping horizontally or 3 feet higher if jumping vertically.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 7; Price 340 gpThe bonus to Speed is +5 feet and the bonus to checks is +2.Type 
greater; 
Level
 14; Price 4,250 gpThe bonus to Speed is +10 feet and the bonus to checks is +4.IMMOVABLE ROD
 ITEM 
9 Price 600 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation
  Operate Activation
This flat iron bar has a small button that you push when you wish to 
activate the rod's magic. The rod is then anchored in place, defying 
gravity if need be. If the button is pushed again with an Interact 
basic action, the rod deactivates, ending the anchoring magic. While 
anchored, the rod can be moved only if 8,000 pounds of pressure 
are applied to it or if a creature attempting to force the rod out of 
place critically succeeds at a DC 30 Athletics check (though most 
intelligent creatures can just push the button to release the rod).
INDESTRUCTIBLE SHIELD
 ITEM 
18
Price 23,000 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 An indestructible shield
 is a legendary heavy adamantine shield 
(Hardness 13) that can't be dented or broken. It can be destroyed 
only by a 
disintegrate
 spell dealing at least 90 damage to it, or 
by an artifact tied to destruction, such as a 
sphere of annihilation
.INEXPLICABLE APPARATUS
 ITEM 
19
Price 32,000 gpMethod of Use worn, garment; 
Bulk 2THis strange and intricate harness fits snuggly to 
the torso. Once you invest the apparatus, numerous artiflcial 
limbs with various tools, clamps, and lenses whirl into action, 
following your mental commands efiortlessly.
When using this apparatus, you gain a +5 item bonus to 
Crafting checks to Craft or Repair and you reduce the minimum 
number of days to Craft an item by 1 day (minimum 1 day). If 
you spend more downtime to continue work on the item after 
Invested
Primal 
Transmutation
MagicalTransmutation
Abjuration 
MagicalInvested
Magical 
Transmutation
395 FLAME TONGUE
GLOOM BLADE
DAGGER OF
VENOMHOLY AVENGER
SKY HAMMER
LION'S SHIELD
FORGE WARDEN
STAFF OF
CONJURATION
STAFF OF
POWER
WAND OF 
MAGIC 
MISSILESTAFF OF
HEALINGWAND
OF HEAL
STAFF OF 
EVOCATION
COVETED OBJECTS
Adventurers hear rumors of magniflcent items of 
ages past, crafters seek out rare formulas to add to 
their collections, and combatants gaze in envy at the 
magic items their adversaries wield. Crafters can 
make items the group desires when they reach the 
right level, but you can excite your players by giving 
items out at earlier levels in treasure hoards and as 
rewards for quests the adventurers undertake.
Many items are staples of the game, and players 
seek them out for their characters at the earliest 
opportunity. These include the best magic weapons 
and magic armor they can afiord. (Characters who can't 
wear armor pick up 
bracers of armor
 instead, while 
monks and other unarmed combatants often choose 
handwraps of mighty fists
 rather than weapons.) Items 
to improve their important skills are also desirable.
As they approach level 14, they'll start looking for 
the potent items that increase their ability scores: 
anklets of alacrity (Dex), 
belt of giant strength
 (Str), 
belt of regeneration
 (Con), 
circlet of persuasion
 (Cha), 
diadem of intellect (Int), and 
headband of inspired 
wisdom (Wis). These are excellent items to give out 
a bit early, and can be chosen to suit the group's 
adversaries. If a 12th-level group defeats a canny 
mastermind, they might find he was wearing a 
diadem 
of intellect. No wonder he was such trouble!
396the minimum number of days, on a success, each day you spend 
reduces the remaining raw materials cost as though your level 
were 1 higher; on a critical success, each day you spend reduces 
the remaining raw material cost as through your level were 2 
higher. If you are 20th level, on a critical success your progress 
is 500 sp, 1,000 sp, 2,000 sp, or 3,000 sp for trained, expert, 
master, or legendary rank, respectively.
INVISIBILITY POTION
 ITEM 
3 Price 8 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
Upon drinking this potion, you're afiected by a 
2nd-level 
invisibility spell. IRON MEDALLION 
 ITEM 
9 Price 80 gpMethod of Use affixed, armor;
 Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You 
attempt a Will save against a fear efiect, but 
haven't rolled yet.
Requirements
 You have the bravery class feature.
This small medallion is usually shaped like a shield or some other symbol of protection. When you activate the medallion, treat 
a critical failure on the save as a failure, and treat a failure on 
the save as a success. Regardless of the result, you gain a +2 
circumstance bonus to saves against fear for 1 minute.
JADE CAT
 ITEM 
1 Price 2 gpMethod of Use affixed, armor;
 Bulk —Activation 
 Command Activation
Requirements
 You are trained in Acrobatics.
A jade cat is typically worn as a pendant upon a suit of armor. 
When you activate the cat, for the next minute, you are not flat-
footed when you Balance.
JAVELIN OF LIGHTNING
 ITEM 
8 Price 54 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
This item functions as an expert-quality javelin. 
However, when you activate the javelin by throwing it, the javelin 
shatters immediately after leaving your hand and unleashes its 
magic as a 4th-level 
lightning bolt originating from your space. 
The bolt deals 5d12 electricity damage and has a Reflex save DC 
of 22.Craft Requirements 
Supply a casting of lightning bolt (4th level).
KNAPSACK OF HALFLINGKIND
 ITEM 
9 Price 675 gpMethod of Use worn, backpack; 
Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
This sturdy leather satchel contains three 
compartments fastened with large buttons. 
The first compartment is lined in blue satin and contains an 
Consumable 
IllusionMagicalPotion
Abjuration 
Consumable 
MagicalTrinket
Abjuration 
Consumable 
MagicalTrinket
ConsumableElectricity 
Evocation
 MagicalConjuration 
ExtradimensionalHealingInvested
Magicalextradimensional space equivalent to a 
type II bag of holding. Using 
it requires two hands, just like using a 
bag of holding. The second compartment has no lining. You can pull forth 
master-quality cookware and cooking utensils from it. Once they 
have been used to prepare a meal, the items transform into master-
quality plates and silverware, and they evaporate once the meal 
has been eaten, taking any leftovers with them. The compartment 
provides only kitchenware, not any food.
The third compartment is lined with plush purple velvet, and 
contains small objects wrapped in parchment paper. Removing 
and unwrapping one with an Interact action reveals a small berry 
tart, which the creature that unwrapped it can immediately eat 
with an Operate Activation action to recover 2d8+4 Hit Points. The 
knapsack produces four tarts per day, which appear at breakfast 
time. Any tarts not eaten by the end of the day evaporate.
LIGHT AMMUNITION
 ITEM 
1 Price 2 gpAmmunition any When shot, this ammunition sheds light in a 20-foot radius for 10 minutes. If it hits a creature, it 
sticks to them, causing them to shed light in the same radius 
instead. A creature can remove the ammunition with an Interact 
action; it continues to glow for the rest of its duration.
LION'S SHIELD
 ITEM 
6 Price 245 gp
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation
  Operate Activation; 
Trigger 
You Raise your Shield.
This expert-quality heavy steel shield (Hardness 6) is forged into 
the shape of a roaring lion's head, and it can be dented three 
times, rather than twice, before it becomes broken.
When Raising the Shield, you can activate it to animate the 
lion's head and immediately make a melee Strike with the shield 
as part of the Raise a Shield action. When activated in this way, 
the shield's biting maw becomes a martial melee weapon that 
deals 2d6 piercing damage and has the deadly 1d6 trait; it can't 
be enhanced to gain potency. Until the end of your turn, you can 
Strike to attack with the shield again. These subsequent Strikes 
don't cost Resonance Points.
LUCK BLADE
 ITEM 
19
Price 30,000 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger 
You attack 
with the luck blade. Luck and good fortune bless the wielder of this +4 legendary 
shortsword
. Once per day when you dislike the result of your 
attack roll with the 
luck blade, you can activate the blade to reroll 
the attack roll. You must then use the second roll.
Furthermore, a 
luck blade contains one wish when crafted. You 
can cast this spell as an innate arcane spell while wielding the luck 
blade, expending the spell. A spellcaster who can cast 
wish can put 
another wish into the blade by spending 10,000 gp and 4 days of 
downtime. A 
luck blade can hold no more than one 
wish at a time.
Craft Requirements 
Supply a casting of wish. Consumable 
Evocation
LightMagicalConjuration 
MagicalDivination 
Fortune
Magical397 MAESTRO'S INSTRUMENT 
 ITEM 
10
Price 950 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk 1 Activation
  Operate Activation
These master-quality instruments take the form of all varieties of 
handheld musical instruments. A maestro's instrument
 grants you 
a +3 item bonus to Performance checks while playing music with 
the instrument. Once per day, you can activate the instrument by 
playing it to produce the effects of a 4th-level 
charm spell. MAGIC ARMOR
 ITEM 
3+
Method of Use worn, armor
A suit of magic armor is simply a suit of armor with a potency rune and no property runes (for more 
about runes, see page 370). The armor's item bonus to AC and 
TAC increases by the potency value, and you also gain an item 
bonus to saving throws equal to the potency value.
The Prices given here are for an item of the listed quality (the 
lowest option) and not made of any special materials. For an item 
of higher than the minimum quality or that's created from special 
materials, add the difierence between the base item's Price and 
the Price for a higher-quality version of the base item, or the 
Price for special material. For example, 
+1 master full plate would 
have a Price 310 gp higher than the expert-quality 
+1 magic heavy armor listed below, since expert-quality full plate costs 50 
gp and master-quality full plate costs 360 gp.
Type 
+1 magic light or medium armor; Level
 3; Price 60 gpThis expert light or medium armor has a 
+1 armor potency rune. Type 
+1 magic heavy armor; Level
 4; Price 100 gpThis expert heavy armor has a 
+1 armor potency rune. Type 
+2 magic armor; Level
 7; Price 360 gpThis expert armor has a 
+2 armor potency rune. Type 
+3 magic armor; Level
 11; Price 1,400 gp
This master armor has a +3 armor potency rune. Type 
+4 magic armor; Level
 15; Price 6,500 gpThis master armor has a +4 armor potency rune. Type 
+5 magic armor; Level
 19; Price 40,000 gpThis legendary armor has a +5 armor potency rune. MAGIC WEAPON
 ITEM 
4+
A magic weapon is simply a weapon with a potency 
rune and no property runes. (For more about runes, 
see page 370.) You gain an item bonus to attack rolls with the 
weapon equal to the value of the potency rune, and you add 
that number of weapon damage dice to damage rolls with the 
weapon. For instance, a +
1 dagger would give you a +1 item bonus 
to attack with it and would deal 2d4 damage on a hit instead of 
1d4. A +2 greataxe
 would give you a +2 item bonus to hit and 
would deal 3d12 damage.
The Prices given here are for an item of the listed quality (the 
lowest option) and not made of any special materials. For an item 
of higher than the minimum quality or that's created from special 
materials, add the difierence between the base item's Price and 
the Price for a higher-quality version of the base item, or the Price 
for special material. For example, a 
+1 master dagger
 would have 
a Price 325 gp higher than the Price listed below, since a dagger 
Enchantment 
Invested
MagicalAbjuration 
Invested
MagicalEvocation
 Magicalwith an item quality of expert costs 35 gp and a dagger with an 
item quality of master costs 360 gp. Type 
+1 magic weapon; Level
 4; Price 100 gpThis expert weapon has a 
+1 weapon
 potency rune. Type 
+2 magic weapon; Level
 8; Price 500 gpThis expert weapon has a 
+2 weapon
 potency rune. Type 
+3 magic weapon; Level
 12; Price 2,000 gpThis expert weapon has a 
+3 weapon
 potency rune. Type 
+4 magic weapon; Level
 16; Price 10,000 gpThis master weapon has a 
+4 weapon
 potency rune. Type 
+5 magic weapon; Level
 20; Price 70,000 gpThis legendary weapon has a 
+5 weapon
 potency rune. MAIL OF LUCK
 ITEM 
12
Price 1,900 gpMethod of Use worn, armor;
 Bulk 3 Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger 
You are hit 
or critically hit with an attack, but damage hasn't been rolled yet. 
This suit of +2 master splint mail has a large green gemstone 
inset in a prominent location. You can activate the armor once 
per day to force the attacker to reroll the attack roll and use the 
new result. This efiect has the fortune trait.
Activating the armor causes the gemstone to turn gray and 
become inert. Its green color returns after 1 week, or when an 
enemy critically succeeds at an attack roll targeting you; even if 
the armor's power returns before a week has elapsed, it can't be 
activated more than once per day.
MATTOCK OF THE TITANS
 ITEM 
19
 Price 40,000 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk 16 Activation
  Operate Activation
This 15-foot-long adamantine digging tool is far too big for you 
to wield unless you are wearing a 
belt of giant strength, in which case you can wield it as though it were appropriately sized for 
you and had 2 Bulk. When used as a weapon, the 
mattock of the titans has the statistics of a master-quality 
+4 adamantine keen great pick
.While you're wielding the 
mattock of the titans, your item 
bonus to Athletics checks increases to +5. You can use it to 
loosen or push soft earth at a rate of 1 minute per 5-foot cube, 
or to smash solid stone at the rate of 5 minutes per 5-foot-cube.
Once per day, you can activate the mattock and dig furiously 
to nonmagically replicate the effects of an 
earthquake spell. Craft Requirements
 You must be a titan, and the initial raw 
materials must include 11,200 gp of adamantine.
MENDING LATTICE
 ITEM 
11
 Price 170 gpMethod of Use affixed, shield or weapon;
 Bulk —Activation
  Command Activation; 
Trigger
 The affixed item would become broken or destroyed.
Requirements
 You are a master in Crafting.
This lattice is formed of reinforced iron shaped into a perfect 
octagon. When you activate the lattice, it instantly and 
completely repairs the affixed item.
Divination 
Invested
MagicalEvocation
 Magical 
Abjuration
ConsumableMagicalTrinket 
398 MENTALIST'S STAFF
 ITEM 
3+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)This polished wooden stafi bears a swirling motif 
suggestive of the folds of a brain. You gain a +2 
circumstance bonus to checks to identify mental magic. 
Type
 lesser; Level
 3; Price 60 gp; Maximum Charges 1
Ł daze 
(cantrip)
Ł mindlink (level 1)

Ł phantom pain (level 1)
Type 
standard;
 Level
 7; Price 360 gp; Maximum Charges 4
Ł paranoia
 (level 2)

Ł hypercognition
 (level 3)

Ł phantom pain (level 3)
Type 
greater;
 Level
 11; Price 1,400 gp;
 Maximum Charges 7
Ł modify memory (level 4)

Ł telepathy (level 4)

Ł phantom pain (level 5)

Ł synaptic pulse (level 5)

Ł synesthesia (level 5)
Craft Requirements 
Supply one casting of each listed spell. MESMERIZING OPAL 
 ITEM 
6 Price 28 gpMethod of Use affixed, armor;
 Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You 
attempt a Deception check to Feint, but you 
haven't rolled yet.
Requirements
 You are an expert in Deception.
This silver-bound opal pendant is afire with iridescent patterns. 
When you activate the opal, you treat a critical failure on the 
Deception check as a failure and a success as a critical success.
MESSENGER'S RING
 ITEM 
10+
Method of Use worn, shoes;
 Bulk LActivation
 10 minutes (Focus Activation)
This silver signet ring changes to match the 
insignia of the lord or organization you serve. It grants you an 
item bonus to Diplomacy checks and lets you cast 
message as an innate arcane spell at will. You can spend 10 minutes using 
Focus Activations on a message in order to cast 
dream message 
to deliver it to someone's dreams.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 10; Price 880 gpThe ring grants a +3 item bonus. Type 
greater; 
Level
 17; Price 14,000 gp; Activation
 10 minutes (Focus Activation) or 
 CommandThe ring grants a +5 item bonus. You can also spend 3 
Command Activation actions to cast 
sending to deliver a message 
to any target. MONKEY PIN
 ITEM 
3 Price 6 gpMethod of Use affixed, armor;
 Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You 
attempt an Athletics check to Climb, but you 
haven't rolled yet.
Divination
Invested
MagicalStafiConsumable 
Enchantment 
MagicalTrinket
Enchantment 
Invested
MagicalConsumable 
Transmutation 
MagicalTrinket
Requirements
 You are an expert in Athletics.
This small brass pin is in the shape of a monkey climbing a tree. 
When you activate this trinket, treat a success on the Athletics 
check as a critical success and a critical failure as a failure. If you 
critically succeed at the Athletics check, you can move your full 
Speed during that Climb action. 
MUMMIFIED BAT
 ITEM 
6 Price 25 gpMethod of Use affixed, weapon;
 Bulk —Activation 
 Command Activation
Requirements
 You have the Blind-Fight class feat.
These trinkets are magically treated corpses of tiny bats bound 
in papyrus. When you activate the bat, you treat any adjacent 
unseen creature as concealed and any adjacent sensed or 
concealed creature as seen until the start of your next turn or 
until the creature moves away, whichever comes first.
MURDERER'S KNOT
 ITEM 
7 Price 45 gpMethod of Use affixed, weapon;
 Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You use the 
Twist the Knife class feat with the affixed weapon.
This black strand of leather is tied so as to make it look like 
a peace knot when a weapon is in its scabbard or otherwise 
stowed, but it does not hamper drawing the weapon in any way. 
When you activate the knot, Twist the Knife deals persistent 
bleed damage equal to the full sneak attack damage dealt by the 
required Strike, rather than reduced damage.
NECKLACE OF FIREBALLS
 ITEM 
5+
Method of Use worn;
 Bulk —Activation
  Operate Activation; see text
This string of beads can be worn as a necklace or 
carried in a hand. (Either way, you must invest the item to be able 
to activate it.) When tied together as a necklace, it appears to be 
a hemp string with lustrous red beads of various sizes hanging 
from it. When held in the hand, it appears in its true form: a 
golden chain with golden spheres attached by flne threads.
You can spend an Operate Activation action to detach a sphere 
from the necklace. You must spend a second Operate Activation 
action to hurl the sphere up to 70 feet. (This second Operate 
Activation action has the ranged trait.) Where the sphere lands, 
it detonates as a 
fireball 
(see page 224). 
Numerous varieties of the 
necklace of fireballs 
exist, each with 
a different Reflex save DC and a combination of spheres that deal 
different amounts of damage, as listed below. When all the beads 
are gone, the necklace can no longer be activated.
Type
 I; Level
 5; Price 44 gp
One 6d6, two 4d6 (DC 19)
Type
 II; Level
 7; Price 115 gpOne 8d6, one 6d6, two 4d6 (DC 21)
Type
 III; Level
 9; Price 300 gpOne 10d6, two 8d6, two 6d6 (DC 23)
Type
 IV; Level
 11; Price 700 gpOne 12d6, two 10d6, three 8d6 (DC 26)
Consumable 
Divination
 MagicalTrinket
Consumable 
Evocation
 MagicalTrinket
Evocation 
Invested
Magical399 Type
 V; Level
 13; Price 1,600 gpOne 14d6, two 12d6, four 10d6 (DC 30)
Type
 VI; Level
 15; Price 4,200 gpOne 16d6, three 14d6, four 12d6 (DC 32)
Type
 VII; Level
 17; Price 9,600 gpOne 18d6, three 16d6, flve 14d6 (DC 35)
NECTAR OF PURIFICATION
 ITEM 
1 Price 2 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
This oil casts a 1st-level 
purify food and drink 
spell over any food or drink onto which it's poured. The nectar 
evaporates as it takes efiect, leaving the taste and texture of the 
food or drink unaltered.
OATHBOW
 ITEM 
10
Price 1,000 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 2 Activation
  Command Activation
Constructed of white wood with ornate designs carved into its 
surface, this master-quality 
+2 composite longbow
 appears to have been made by elves. Sometimes when you loose an arrow, 
its whistling in flight sounds like a voice whispering in Elven, 
wishing for the swift defeat of your enemies.
You can activate the bow by swearing an oath to destroy one 
creature you can see. For the next 7 days or until that creature is 
slain, your attacks with the bow against that creature deal 2d6 
additional damage, and you gain a +2 circumstance bonus to 
Survival checks to Track that creature. Your critical hits against 
the target gain the bow's critical specialization efiect (see page 
183); if they would already do so, they instead increase the DC 
of the Athletics check to break free when critically hit to DC 20.
After you activate the bow, you can't activate it again for 
7 days. If you kill the creature you've sworn an oath against, 
the oath ends and you need wait only 1 minute before you can 
activate it again.
OBFUSCATION OIL
 ITEM 
15
Price 700 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
You can spread this blue-gray gel on a single 
item with a Bulk of 3 or less. That object becomes immune to 
divination magic of 8th level or lower (such as 
locate). This oil is permanent, but it can be removed with acid. Such removal 
usually takes 1 minute for objects with Bulk of 1 or less, or a number of minutes equal to the item's Bulk.
OBSIDIAN RELIQUARY
 ITEM 
12
Price 250 gpMethod of Use affixed, shield;
 Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You use 
Shield Block with the affixed shield against a 
critical hit by a weapon attack. 
This tiny stone box holds some minor relic to an evil deity. 
Consumable 
Magical 
Necromancy
OilDivination 
MagicalConsumable 
IllusionMagicalOilConsumable 
DivineEvil
Necromancy 
Trinket
When you activate the reliquary, the efiect depends on your 
alignment on the good–evil axis.

Ł Evil
 You recover 4d8 Hit Points (even if you are undead) 
and you gain a +1 conditional bonus to attack rolls and 
damage rolls until the end of your next turn.

Ł Neutral You recover 2d8 Hit Points.

Ł Good You become sick 2.
Craft Requirements
 You must be evil. 
OIL OF ANIMATION
 ITEM 
11
Price 175 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
You can rub this bronze-colored oil onto a melee 
weapon to grant it the abilities of a weapon with the 
dancing rune. 
Once the weapon fails a flat check and falls, this efiect ends.
OIL OF KEEN EDGES 
 ITEM 
10
Price 125 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
When applied to a piercing or slashing melee 
weapon, this oil makes the weapon sharper and more dangerous 
for 1 minute, granting it the abilities of a weapon with the 
keen rune. OIL OF MENDING
 ITEM 
3 Price 6 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
Applying this oil to an item casts a 2nd-level 
mending spell that repairs the item. If the item was broken, it is 
no longer broken. If the item has Dents, it loses those Dents. This 
restoration doesn't restore lost pieces. For instance, if used on a 
text with missing pages, it wouldn't recreate the lost pages.
OIL OF POTENCY
  
ITEM 
2 Price 5 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
When you apply this oil to a nonmagical weapon or 
suit of armor, that item immediately becomes magically potent. 
The item gains a temporary +1 potency rune of the appropriate 
type, even if it isn't expert-quality or higher. This lasts for 1 minute.
OIL OF WEIGHTLESSNESS
 ITEM 
2+
Method of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
You can spread this shimmering oil on an item to 
make it feel weightless.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 2; Price 4 gpThis oil can be applied to an item of 1 Bulk or less to make its bulk negligible for 1 hour.
Type 
greater; 
Level
 6; Price 25 gpThis oil can be applied to an item of 2 Bulk or less to make its bulk negligible for 8 hours. Consumable 
MagicalOilTransmutation 
Consumable 
MagicalOilTransmutation 
Consumable 
MagicalOilTransmutation 
Consumable 
MagicalOilTransmutation
Consumable 
MagicalOilTransmutation
400 ONYX PANTHER
 ITEM 
5 Price 19 gpMethod of Use affixed, armor; 
Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You 
attempt to Sneak, but you haven't rolled yet.
Requirements
 You are an expert in Stealth.
This small stone is in the stylized shape of a stalking panther. 
When you activate the panther, you can move your full Speed 
instead of half your Speed on the triggering action.
OWLBEAR CLAW
 ITEM 
1 Price 3 gpMethod of Use affixed, weapon; 
Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You critically 
succeed at an attack roll with the affixed weapon.
Requirements
 You are an expert with the affixed weapon.
This claw set in an iron clasp and chain isn't always the claw 
of an owlbear, but this trinket is associated with that strange 
beast due to its original formula. When you activate the claw, the 
triggering attack gains the weapon's critical specialization efiect. 
If you already gain the critical specialization efiect for the affixed 
weapon, this trinket has no efiect.
PANACEA
 ITEM 
13
Price 350 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
This potion attempts to counteract the effects of 
all curses and diseases afiecting you, as well as 
any blindness and deafness caused by spells afiecting you. The 
potion has a counteract level of 7 and a +20 modifier for the roll.
PENETRATING AMMUNITION
 ITEM 
10
Price 125 gpAmmunition arrow, bolt 
Activation
  Operate Activation
When you activate and shoot 
penetrating ammunition, treat the 
attack as a 60-foot line originating from you. You roll one attack 
roll and compare the result to the AC of each target in that line. 
The ammunition ignores up to 10 of the target's resistance, and 
it can penetrate walls up to 1 foot thick with Hardness 10 or less. 
Each target that takes damage from this ammunition also takes 
1d6 persistent bleed damage. If your attack roll result is a natural 20, you get an automatic 
critical success against only the first target struck, but can still 
get a critical hit on other targets if your result exceeds their 
AC by 10 or more. If you have access to your bow's critical 
specialization efiect, 
penetrating ammunition 
applies that efiect 
only against a target in the last square of the 60-foot line.
PERSONA MASK
 ITEM 
5+
Method of Use worn, mask; 
Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation (no RP cost)
Despite covering the entire face, this alabaster 
mask does not hinder vision or other senses. Wearing the mask grants an item bonus to Performance skill 
Consumable 
MagicalTransmutation 
Trinket
Consumable 
Evocation
MagicalTrinket
Consumable 
HealingMagical 
Necromancy 
Potion 
Consumable 
MagicalTransmutation
Fortune
IllusionInvested
Magicalchecks while acting, orating, performing comedy, or singing. The 
mask can be activated with a Focus Activation action with no RP 
cost to change the mask's appearance into an artistic rendition of 
a dramatic character of your choice.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 5; Price 155 gpThe mask grants a +2 bonus. Type 
greater; 
Level
 15; Price 6,450 gp; 
Activation 
 Focus 
Activation (no RP cost) or 
 Focus Activation
The mask grants a +4 bonus. Once per day, when you fail a 
Performance check that benefits from the mask's bonus, you can 
Activate the mask as a reaction to change the mask's character 
and reroll the Performance check, using the second result.
PHYLACTERY OF FAITHFULNESS
 ITEM 
7+
Method of Use worn, circlet; 
Bulk LActivation
  Focus Activation
This tiny box holds a fragment of religious scripture 
sacred to a particular deity. The box is affixed to a leather cord 
and tied around your head just above your brow. You don't gain 
any benefit from the phylactery if you don't worship the affiliated 
deity. The phylactery grants you religious wisdom, manifesting 
as an item bonus to Religion checks. Just before you perform 
an action that would be anathema to the phylactery's deity, the 
phylactery warns you of the potential transgression. You can 
activate the phylactery to speciflcally ask for guidance about a 
particular course of action, gaining the effects of an 
augury spell. Type 
standard; 
Level
 7; Price 320 gpThe phylactery grants a +2 bonus, and you can ask for 
guidance once per day.
Type 
greater; 
Level
 13; Price 2,800 gpThe phylactery grants a +4 bonus, and you can ask for 
guidance any number of times each day.
Craft Requirements
 You must worship the phylactery's deity.
 PHYLACTERY OF THE OCCULT
 ITEM 
5+
Method of Use worn, circlet; 
Bulk —Activation
 spellcasting actions of the chosen spell, 1 RPThis amulet is usually hollow and shaped in the form 
of an unblinking eye; its cavity typically holds some fragment of 
occult text. While wearing the phylactery, you gain an item bonus 
to Occultism checks, and you can cast the 
guidance cantrip as an 
innate occult spell.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 5; Price 150 gpThe phylactery grants a +2 bonus. Type 
greater; 
Level
 14; Price 4,250 gpThe phylactery grants a +4 bonus, and you can activate it to cast 
dream message
 (4th level) as an innate occult spell.
PLATE ARMOR OF THE DEEP
 ITEM 
13
Price 2,800 gpMethod of Use worn, armor; 
Bulk 4THis suit of +3 full plate is decorated with a wave and 
flsh-scale motif. While wearing it, you take no Speed reduction 
or armor check penalty when Swimming, gain a +3 item bonus 
to Athletics checks to Swim, can breathe underwater, and can 
converse with any water-breathing creature that has a language.
Divination
DivineInvested
Divination 
Invested
OccultAbjuration 
Invested
Magical 
401 AEON STONES
PERSONA MASK
MUMMIFIED BAT
BOOTS OF 
ELVENKIND
CELESTIALARMORSTORIED ITEMS
In contrast to the more common items many players covet (see page 
395), other items work best if they reflect the stories they've been a part 
of, the places they've traveled, and the people they've met. Characters 
are more likely to hold on to items that have meaning to them.
Characters might receive 
boots of elvenkind
 as a gift from an elf they 
rescue in their early days as adventurers. Later in their career, they 
might visit that same elf's home village in the forests of Kyonin. After 
protecting his home from demonic invaders, they receive a gift from 
the village's leaders: a 
cloak of elvenkind
! This item might even have a 
customized fiourish to make it more special, like an embroidered scene 
on the lining depicting the heroes battling alongside their elven allies.
Even simple items can have a minor alteration to make them more 
memorable, like a persona mask with the name of every play a previous 
owner performed in scribed on the interior.
THIRD EYE
WHISPER OF 
THE FIRST LIE
402 POSSIBILITY TOME
 ITEM 
18
Price 20,000 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk 2 Activation
  Focus Activation
An array of semiprecious stones is set into the ornate silver 
and beaten-copper cover of this thick and weighty tome. If you 
open the book before activating it, its vellum pages are blank 
and pristine. When you activate the 
possibility tome, choose a single skill with the Recall Knowledge activity (or a single category of Lore, 
if you choose that skill). Once activated, the book features pages 
and pages of information about that skill, though only you can 
see the information. While the pages are full, you can spend an 
Interact action perusing the book just before attempting a check 
to Recall Knowledge with the chosen skill. This grants you a 
+5 item bonus to the check, and you treat a critical failure as a 
failure instead. The information within the book disappears after 
24 hours or when someone activates the tome again. 
POTENCY CRYSTAL 
 ITEM 
1 Price 2 gpMethod of Use 
affixed, nonmagical weapon; 
Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You make 
an attack with the affixed weapon, but you haven't 
rolled yet.
This fiuorite crystal glows with a strange phosphorescence. 
When you activate the crystal, treat the affixed weapon as a 
+1 magic weapon
 for the attack, gaining a +1 item bonus to the 
attack roll and increasing the damage on a hit by one additional 
weapon damage die.
POTION OF DISGUISE
 ITEM 
7+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
Upon imbibing this potion, you take on the 
appearance of a different creature for 2d12 hours, 
receiving the effects of the spell that would be required to 
produce the transformation (such as 
animal form or 
humanoid transformation
). Drinking the potion doesn't impart the 
knowledge of how long the efiect lasts; the GM rolls the duration 
in secret. The disguise doesn't change your statistics or give you 
any of the special abilities of the creature you're imitating, with 
the exception of what items you can hold or wear (for example, 
your new form might lack opposable thumbs).
Drinking this potion uses the same rules as the Impersonate 
use of Deception. Onlookers always assume you're the chosen 
type of creature unless they're actively Seeking, and you gain 
a +4 conditional bonus to your Deception DC against such 
Perception checks.
The potion maintains your own size, if possible, but can 
enlarge you up to one size or shrink you by any number of sizes. 
For example, if you are Medium and drink a 
potion of green 
dragon disguise, you'll take on the appearance of a Medium 
green dragon. If you drink a 
potion of disguise that would enlarge 
you by more than one size category (from Medium to Huge, for 
example), the magic is negated and the potion is wasted.
Magical 
Divination
Consumable 
Evocation
MagicalTrinket
Consumable 
Polymorph
Potion
Transmutation
Type
 standard; 
Level
 7; Price 40 gpThis potion transforms you into a particular type of creature; for 
example, it could be a 
potion of elf disguise, potion of frog disguise, or potion of fire giant disguise
. When crafting a standard 
potion of 
disguise, you must have a bit of blood, hair, or flesh of the creature 
the potion will allow the drinker to imitate. The creature has to 
be of a speciflc kind, such as "house cat" or "lion" rather than just 
"cat," or "fire giant" or "ogre" rather than just "giant."
Type
 greater; 
Level
 10 (Uncommon); Price 120 gpA greater potion of disguise
 lets you picture the form you want 
to change into as you drink it, and it changes you into that form. 
You can attempt to imitate a speciflc unique creature in this way, 
though you don't automatically pass as that speciflc creature. 
POTION OF FLYING
 ITEM 
8+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
Upon drinking this efiervescent concoction, you 
gain a fiy Speed of 40 feet. Type
 standard; 
Level
 8; Price 60 gp; Duration 
1 minuteType
 greater; 
Level
 14; Price 600 gp; Duration 
1 hourPOTION OF LEAPING 
 ITEM 
5 Price 15 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
For 10 minutes after you drink this flzzy potion, 
you can cast the 1st-level 
jump spell as an innate spell at will.
POTION OF QUICKNESS
 ITEM 
6 Price 30 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
Upon drinking this thin, metallic potion, you gain 
the benefit of haste for 1 minute. POTION OF RESISTANCE
 ITEM 
5+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
By drinking this thick, fortifying potion, you gain 
resistance against a single type of energy damage 
for 1 hour. Each 
potion of resistance
 is created to defend against 
acid, cold, electricity, fire, or sonic damage (such as an 
potion of fire resistance
 or a greater potion of cold resistance
).Type
 lesser; Level
 5; Price 18 gpYou gain resistance 5 to the appropriate energy type.
Type
 standard; 
Level
 9; Price 80 gpYou gain resistance 10 to the appropriate energy type.
Type
 greater; 
Level
 13; Price 360 gpYou gain resistance 15 to the appropriate energy type.
POTION OF SWIMMING
 ITEM 
6 Price 25 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
This potion tastes like saltwater, and sandy grit 
Consumable 
MagicalPotion 
Transmutation
Consumable 
MagicalPotion 
Transmutation
Consumable 
MagicalPotion 
Transmutation
Abjuration 
Consumable 
MagicalPotion
Consumable 
MagicalPotion 
Transmutation
403settles to the bottom of its container. When you drink it, you 
gain a swim Speed equal to your land Speed for 10 minutes.
POTION OF TONGUES
 ITEM 
10
Price 100 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
For 6 hours after drinking this sour potion, it 
enlivens your tongue with unusual flavors and uncommon 
eloquence, allowing you to speak and understand all languages, 
including nonverbal ones such as sign language, though the potion 
doesn't allow you to read these languages in their written form.
POTION OF WATER BREATHING
 ITEM 
3 Price 6 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
This fllmy, gray potion smells of an old flsh midden, 
and tastes even worse. After drinking this potion, you gain the 
effects of a 2nd-level 
water breathing 
spell for 1 hour. 
PRIMEVAL MISTLETOE
 ITEM 
6+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk —Activation
  Operate Activation
This sprig of holly and mistletoe doesn't wilt or rot. 
It can be used as a primal focus, and it also grants the creature 
holding it an item bonus to Nature checks. You can activate the 
mistletoe by squeezing juice from one of the berries and smearing 
it onto a nonmagical club or stafi to cast shillelagh upon it. Once 
per day, you can twine the sprig around the wrist of one hand and 
touch a tree to cast 
tree shape 
upon yourself, except you become a 
vine on the tree instead of a tree. 
Type 
standard; 
Level
 6; Price 230 gpThe sprig grants a +2 bonus. Type 
greater; 
Level
 14; Price 4,250 gpThe sprig grants a +4 bonus. Once per day, you can plant 
the primeval mistletoe 
into natural earth or stone. The plant 
immediately sprouts into an area of holly bushes that don't 
impede movement and that pulse with positive energy, 
replicating the effects of a 
field of life spell. This lasts for up to 1 minute, as long as you continue to spend an action each round 
to concentrate on the efiect. When you stop concentrating or 
the duration ends, the holly bushes revert back into the original 
primeval mistletoe
. reflectING SHIELD
 ITEM 
17
Price 13,000 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Command Activation; 
Trigger 
You are targeted by 
a spell. This legendary-quality light silver shield (Hardness 8) is polished 
like a mirror. The shield functions as a 
spellguard shield
 (see page 
408). In addition, once per day when you're targeted by a spell, 
you can activate the shield to attempt to reflect the spell on its 
caster as per spell turning (8th level) with a spell roll of +25.
Craft Requirements
 Supply a casting of spell turning. Consumable 
Divination
MagicalPotion 
Consumable 
Divination
MagicalPotion 
Consumable 
MagicalPotion 
Transmutation
Invested
Primal 
Transmutation
Abjuration
MagicalRETURNING CLASP
 ITEM 
2 Price 4 gpMethod of Use affixed, shield or weapon; 
Bulk —Activation
  Command Activation
Requirements
 You have the Quick Draw class feat, 
you are wearing the paired copper ring (see text), 
and you are within 400 feet of the affixed item. Unlike most 
trinkets, you can activate the 
returning clasp
 even when you're 
not wielding the affixed item.
This copper adornment comes paired with a thin copper ring. 
When you activate the clasp, the affixed item immediately 
appears in the hand wearing the ring. If the hand wearing the ring 
is full when you activate this trinket, the item you were holding 
falls to the ground in your space and the affixed item appears in 
your now-empty hand.
RHINO HIDE
 ITEM 
9 Price 640 gpMethod of Use worn, armor; 
Bulk 2THis +2 hide armor is made from rhinoceros hide. It 
has an armor check penalty of –1 instead of –3. When you use the 
Sudden Charge class feat while wearing this armor, your Strike 
deals 2d6 additional damage. Craft Requirements
 The initial raw materials must include 320 
gp of rhinoceros hide (a common material).
RING OF CLIMBING
 ITEM 
12
Price 1,750 gp
Method of Use worn; 
Bulk —This thick golden band bears claw motifs that 
dig deep into sheer surfaces when you are Climbing. This 
ring grants you a climb Speed equal to half your land Speed. 
Penalties to your Speed (including those from your armor) 
apply to this climb Speed. RING OF COUNTERSPELLS
 ITEM 
10
Price 925 gpMethod of Use worn; 
Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger 
You are 
targeted by or within the area of the spell stored within the ring.
This ornate silver ring bears two competing geometric designs 
of brightly colored and wildly clashing inlaid gemstones. A 
spellcaster can cast a single spell into this ring as long as no spell is currently stored within. If they're successful, the spell's efiect 
does not occur, and the spell's power is instead stored within 
the ring. While the ring has a spell stored within, if you are the 
target or within the area of another casting of the stored spell 
while you wear the ring, you can activate the ring as a reaction to 
attempt to dispel the triggering spell (see page 197). Once you do, 
the stored spell's energy is spent, though you can cast or have 
someone else cast a new spell into the ring later. 
You can use a Command Activation on the ring without 
spending Resonance Points to harmlessly expend the stored spell, 
emptying the ring and allowing you to place another spell into it.
When you invest a 
ring of counterspells, you immediately 
know the name and level of the spell stored inside, if any. A 
ring Conjuration
ConsumableMagicalTeleportation
Trinket
Invested
MagicalTransmutation
Invested
MagicalTransmutation
Abjuration
Invested
Magical 
404of counterspells found as treasure has a 50% chance of having a 
spell stored in it. The GM determines that spell.
RING OF ENERGY RESISTANCE
 ITEM 
6+
Method of Use worn; 
Bulk —This ring grants you protection against one type 
of energy damage: acid, cold, electricity, fire, or 
sonic. Each ring is crafted to protect against a particular type 
of energy damage that can't be changed later, and its design 
usually embodies the type of energy it protects the wearer 
from in some way. For instance, a 
ring of fire resistance
 might 
be capped with a ruby, whereas a 
ring of cold resistance
 features 
a sapphire instead. 
Type
 lesser; Level
 6; Price 245 gp; 
Resistance
 5 Type
 standard; 
Level
 10; Price 975 gp; Resistance
 10 Type
 greater; 
Level
 14; Price 4,400 gp; 
Resistance
 15 RING OF LIES
 ITEM 
6+
Method of Use worn; 
Bulk —Activation
  Operate Activation
This plain silver ring has an almost oily sheen. 
While wearing the standard version, you gain an item bonus to 
Deception checks. You can activate the ring by spinning it around 
your flnger to magically throw your voice. 
Type 
standard; 
Level
 6; Price 215 gpThe ring grants a +2 bonus, and activating the ring grants the 
effects of a 1st-level 
ventriloquism
 spell (DC 20).Type 
greater; 
Level
 13; Price 2,600 gpThe ring grants a +4 bonus, and activating the ring grants the 
effects of a 2nd-level 
ventriloquism
 spell (DC 30), allowing you to 
sound like a different sort of creature. 
RING OF MANIACAL DEVICES
 ITEM 
10+
Method of Use worn; 
Bulk —Activation
 10 minutes (Operate Activation)
This ring seems like simple tarnished brass, but when you wear it, it enhances your curiosity about traps and 
devices of all kinds. You can spend an Interact action to pull a set 
of thieves' tools from the ring. These tools appear in your hand 
and fold back into the ring if they would leave your possession. 
They grant you an item bonus to Thievery checks to Disable 
a Device, and the ring's insights grant you the same bonus to 
Crafting checks to Craft and Repair traps and snares.
You can activate the ring to create a 
glyph of warding 
containing 
a speciflc spell. You can have only one such glyph active at a time. 
Type 
standard; 
Level
 10; Price 975 gpThe tools grant a +3 bonus, and the ring creates a 4th-level 
glyph of warding 
containing fireball
.Type 
greater; 
Level
 18; Price 4,250 gpThe tools grant a +5 bonus, and the ring creates an 8th-level 
glyph of warding 
containing prismatic spray
.RING OF SWIMMING
 ITEM 
12
Price 1,750 gp
Method of Use worn; 
Bulk —This blue metal ring grants you a swim Speed equal 
Abjuration
Invested
MagicalEnchantmentInvested
MagicalDivination
Invested
MagicalMagicalInvested
Transmutation
to half your land Speed. Speed penalties (including from your 
armor) apply to this swim Speed. RING OF THE RAM
  
ITEM 
5+
Method of Use worn; 
Bulk —Activation
  Operate Activation; see text
This heavy iron ring is shaped to look like the 
head of a ram. While wearing the ring, you can 
call forth a ram-shaped force to strike at one foe that you can 
see within 50 feet. You activate the ring by pointing your flst at 
an enemy as an Operate Activation action, and you can spend 
up to 2 subsequent Operate Activation actions to intensify its 
power; your flnal action gains the attack trait. If you succeed at 
a ranged attack against the target's TAC, you deal an amount of 
force damage determined by the ring's version for each Operate 
Activation action you spent.
In addition, the force attempts to push the target back, with 
the effects of a Shove action. The modifier on the Athletics check 
depends on the ring's version. You can't move with the target as 
part of this Shove, it doesn't take your multiple attack penalty, and 
if the check result is a critical failure, you aren't knocked prone. 
After using the 
ring of the ram, you can't use it again for 1 minute.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 5; Price 160 gpThe ring deals 2d6 force damage for each Operate Activation 
action spent, and the modifier to Shove is +13. 
Type 
greater; 
Level
 12; Price 1,950 gpThe ring deals 3d6 force damage for each Operate Activation 
action spent, and the modifier to Shove is +23. When you spend 
3 Operate actions on the 
greater ring of the ram, you can disperse 
the force in multiple directions, targeting any number of enemies 
within 20 feet instead of one target within 50 feet. RING OF WIZARDRY
 ITEM 
7+
Method of Use worn; 
Bulk —This ring is made from the purest platinum and is 
covered in esoteric arcane symbols. While wearing 
the ring of wizardry, you gain a +2 item bonus to Arcana checks 
and can prepare three additional arcane spells each day if you 
prepare arcane spells, or cast three additional arcane spells each 
day if you cast arcane spells spontaneously. If you take ofi the 
ring for any reason, these additional spells are lost and cannot be 
regained until the following day's daily preparations.
No more than two of the spells prepared or cast using the ring 
can be of the same spell level, and each version of the ring has 
a maximum spell level it allows you to prepare or cast. Even if 
you can cast arcane spells in a variety of different ways (such 
as if you are a draconic sorcerer with the wizard multiclass 
archetype), you can still prepare or cast only three additional 
arcane spells, though you can divide those three spells as you 
wish among your various sources of arcane spells.
Wearing more than one 
ring of wizardry 
has no efiect. Type
 lesser; Level
 7; Price 360 gp; Maximum Spell Level
 1stType
 standard; 
Level
 9; Price 700 gp; Maximum Spell Level
 2ndType
 greater; 
Level
 12; Price 2,000 gp; Maximum Spell Level
 3rd
Type
 major; Level
 14; Price 4,500 gp; Maximum Spell Level
 4thCraft Requirements
 You must be an arcane spellcaster.
Evocation
Force
Invested
MagicalArcane
Divination
Invested
405 CLOAK OF
ELVENKIND
DEMON ARMOR
ITEM CRAFTINGIf even one of your player characters is trained in Crafting, you'll want to provide 
means and the downtime necessary for that activity. This is especially true if a 
character has the Alchemical Crafting or Magical Crafting feat. 
While giving such characters enough downtime is essential, so is providing 
access to workshops and the means to purchase the raw material for their 
creations. Crafting characters often want to create a home base or foster a 
relationship with a guild or other network to facilitate their crafting. Guilds often 
provide workspace and the means for purchasing raw materials, but they often 
require adherence to codes of conduct and have other expectations of their 
members. Of course, finding, maintaining, and even protecting such a workspace, 
guild, or network can be an adventure in its own right.
406 ROBE OF EYES
 ITEM 
17
Price 13,000 gpMethod of Use worn, garment; 
Bulk 1 Activation
  Operate Activation
This garment appears to be an ordinary robe until donned, at 
which point numerous strange and alien eyes of varied shapes 
and colors open and blink across its fabric. While wearing the 
robe, you gain a +4 item bonus to Perception checks, and you 
constantly benefit from the effects of a 2nd-level 
see invisibility spell. You can also see powerful magic auras. The highest-level 
magic aura within 30 feet of you glows in a color that reveals its 
school to you and allows you to determine the 5-foot-cube from 
which the efiect originates.
You can activate the robe to create a magic eye (with the same 
efiect as a 5th-level 
prying eye
 spell); as with the spell, you must 
concentrate on the eye using Focus Activation actions, though it 
costs no further Resonance Points to concentrate on the efiect 
in this way.
The robe of eyes
 is not without its dangers. If any spell with the light trait is cast on you or your square while you are wearing 
the robe, you are blinded for a number of rounds equal to the 
spell's level (minimum 1) unless you succeed at a Fortitude save 
against the light spell's DC.
ROBE OF THE ARCHMAGI
 ITEM 
11+
Method of Use worn, garment; 
Bulk 1 Activation
  Command Activation; 
Trigger 
You 
attempt a saving throw against an arcane spell, but 
you haven't rolled yet.
Embroidered with flne silver thread creating ornate arcane 
patterns, these robes come in a variety of colors, depending on 
their attuned alignment. Good robes are white, neutral robes are 
gray, and evil robes are black. An evil or good robe gains the 
appropriate trait. The robes function only for characters who can 
cast arcane spells and whose alignment matches the robe. If your 
alignment does not match the robe, or you are not an arcane 
spellcaster, you are instead stupefled 2 while wearing a 
robe of 
the archmagi
. This condition can't be removed in any way until 
you remove the robe.
While wearing the robes, you gain the benefits of 
mage armor (at a level depending on the type of robes), an item bonus to 
Arcana checks, a +1 circumstance bonus to saving throws against 
arcane spells, and resistance to damage dealt by arcane spells. In 
addition, once per day you can activate the robe to automatically 
treat your saving throw outcome against the triggering arcane 
spell as a success. Type 
standard; 
Level
 11; Price 1,400 gp
The robes grant a +3 bonus to Arcana checks, resistance 3, 
and the benefits of 4th-level 
mage armor.
Type 
greater; 
Level
 19; Price 40,000 gpThe robes grant a +5 bonus to Arcana checks, resistance 6, 
and the benefits of 8th-level 
mage armor.
 You can also activate 
the robe when an ally within 30 feet is targeted by an arcane 
spell to grant that ally a success on their saving throw; you still 
can activate only it once per day.
Craft Requirements
 You must be an arcane spellcaster.
Divination
Invested
MagicalAbjuration
Arcane
Invested 
RUNESTONE
 ITEM 
1 Price 3 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LThese flat pieces of granite or another hard stone feature a flat 
surface perfect for etching an armor or weapon rune. You can 
etch only one rune upon a stone. Once the stone is etched, it gains the magic school trait of the rune etched upon it. When a rune is transferred from the 
runestone to another object, the runestone is destroyed. The Price listed is for an empty stone; a 
stone holding a rune adds the Price of the rune. SALVE OF ANTIPARALYSIS
 ITEM 
5+
Method of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
Applying this fllmy salve to a creature helps it 
overcome magical paralysis and possibly petriflcation.
Type 
standard; 
Level
 5; Price 15 gpThe creature recovers as if it were the target of a 3rd-level 
remove paralysis
 spell. Type 
greater; 
Level
 11; Price 150 gpThe creature recovers as if it were the target of a 6th-level 
remove paralysis 
spell and a stone to flesh spell. SALVE OF SLIPPERINESS
 ITEM 
5 Price 15 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
This grease can be applied to armor to make it 
extremely slippery for 8 hours. This grants the wearer a +4 item 
bonus to Acrobatics checks to Escape or Squeeze.
SAVIOR SPIKE
 ITEM 
3 Price 6 gpMethod of Use affixed, armor; 
Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You 
attempt to Grab an Edge, but you haven't rolled yet.
Requirements
 You are an expert in Acrobatics.
This pyramid-shaped spike is attached to the chest of a suit of 
armor. When you activate the spike, it shoots out a strand of force 
to help you to gain purchase. Treat a success on the Acrobatics 
check as a critical success, and a critical failure as a failure.
SCROLL OF GLITTERDUST
 ITEM 
3 Price 8 gpActivation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LThis scroll can be used to cast 
glitterdust
 as a 2nd-level spell (spell roll cap +10).
Craft Requirements 
Supply a casting of glitterdust.
SCROLL OF ILLUSORY DISGUISE
 ITEM 
1 Price 3 gpActivation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LThis scroll can be used to cast 
illusory disguise as a 1st-level spell (spell roll cap +8).
ConsumableMagicalConsumableHealingMagicalNecromancy
OilConsumableMagicalOilTransmutation
Abjuration
ConsumableMagicalTrinket
ConsumableEvocation
MagicalScroll
ConsumableIllusionMagicalScroll
407 MORE SCROLLS
The scrolls listed on the previous page are only a small sample, 
using low-level spells that often appear on scrolls. The full rules 
for making scrolls of other spells appear on page 378.
Craft Requirements 
Supply a casting of illusory disguise. SKELETON KEY
 ITEM 
5+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk —Activation
  Operate Activation; 
Trigger
 You 
attempt to Pick a Lock, but haven't rolled yet.
A grinning skull peers out from the ornate bow of this macabre 
key. This key gives you an item bonus to Thievery checks when 
you use it in place of thieves' tools when attempting to Pick 
a Lock. If the 
skeleton key 
becomes broken due to a critical 
failure, it works as standard-quality thieves' tools and loses its 
powers until repaired. The key has additional powers based on 
its type. 
Type
 standard; 
Level
 5; Price 125 gpThe key grants a +2 bonus. Once per day, you can activate the 
skeleton key to cast 
knock (2nd level).
Type 
greater; 
Level
 13; Price 2,400 gp
The key grants a +4 bonus. You can activate the key any 
number of times per day.
SKY HAMMER
 ITEM 
19
Price 40,000 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation
  Command Activation; 
Trigger 
Your attack roll 
with the sky hammer is a critical success. The sturdy, steel head of this 
+4 legendary orichalcum flaming 
shock warhammer 
is shaped like a comet blazing down from 
the heavens.
Whenever you critically hit with the 
sky hammer, you can 
activate it to cast a 6th-level 
fireball
 spell, centered on the 
sky hammer, as an innate arcane spell. You are immune to the 
fireball's
 efiect, but any allies in its area are not.
Craft Requirements
 Supply a casting of fireball
 (6th level), and 
the initial raw materials must include 10,000 gp of orichalcum.
SLEEP ARROW
 ITEM 
2 Price 5 gpAmmunition arrow
Activation
  Operate Activation
An activated 
sleep arrow
 deals no damage, but a living creature hit by it is subject to the effects of 
a sleep spell (DC 16).Craft Requirements
 Supply a casting of sleep. SLIPPERS OF SPIDER CLIMBING
 ITEM 
6 Price 215 gpMethod of Use worn, shoes; 
Bulk LActivation
  Command Activation
When activated, these soft slippers of flne gray silk allow you 
to walk on vertical surfaces, or even to move upside down 
along ceilings. You gain a 20-foot climb Speed that doesn't 
require you to use your hands for 1 minute. Once activated, the 
slippers can't be activated again for 10 minutes. The slippers 
require decent traction for you to walk on a wall, so they 
provide no benefit when you're moving across greased, icy, or 
oiled surfaces. MagicalTransmutation
Evocation
MagicalConsumableEnchantmentMagicalMentalSleepInvested
MagicalTransmutation
SPELL DUELIST'S GLOVES
  ITEM 
8+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Command Activation, 
 Operate 
Activation
These velvet gloves enhance the fiow of magic through their 
flngertips. They grant their wearer an item bonus to non-weapon 
melee touch attack rolls.
Once per day, you can activate the gloves to cast a speciflc spell.
Type
 lesser; Level
 8; Price 500 gpThe gloves grant a +1 bonus and contain 
touch of idiocy. Type
 standard; 
Level
 12; Price 2,000 gpThe gloves grant a +2 bonus and contain 
shocking grasp 
(4th level). 
Type
 greater; 
Level
 16; Price 10,000 gpThe gloves grant a +3 bonus and contain 
purple worm sting
. Type
 supreme; 
Level
 20; Price 70,000 gpThe gloves grant a +4 bonus and contain 
uncontrollable dance
. SPELL DUELIST'S WAND
  ITEM 
8+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)These special wands are tipped with potent magical 
crystals and infused with mystical essence. As with normal wands, you can use a 
spell duelist's wand
 to perform Somatic Casting actions. If you do so with a spell that requires 
a non-weapon ranged attack, you gain an item bonus to your 
attack roll with that spell.
Spell duelist's wands
 have no charges. Instead, they allow you 
to cast their spell once per day, and their spells can be of a level 
higher than 4.Type
 lesser; Level
 8; Price 500 gpThe wand grants a +1 bonus and contains 
acid arrow
. Type
 standard; 
Level
 12; Price 2,000 gpThe wand grants a +2 bonus and contains 
enervation
. Type
 greater; 
Level
 16; Price 10,000 gpThe wand grants a +3 bonus and contains 
disintegrate
. Type
 supreme; 
Level
 20; Price 70,000 gpThe wand grants a +4 bonus and contains 
polar ray
. SPELL SLIVER
 ITEM 
17
Price 1,900 gpMethod of Use affixed, weapon; 
Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 Your 
Strike deals sneak attack damage to a target.
Requirements
 You have the Dispelling Slice class feat.
Made from a treated sliver of cold iron, this trinket makes it 
easier for you to dispel magical effects. Your Strike gains 
Dispelling Slice's enhancement; if the triggering attack was 
already a Dispelling Slice, you can attempt to dispel effects on 
Evocation
Invested
MagicalEvocation
 Invested
MagicalWand
Abjuration
ConsumableMagicalTrinket
408the target twice. Either way, treat your dispel as if it were a 
10th-level spell. 
SPELLGUARD SHIELD
 ITEM 
6 Price 240 gp
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 While you have this expert-quality heavy steel shield (Hardness 6) 
raised, you gain its circumstance bonus to saving throws against 
spells that target you.
SPELLSTRIKE AMMUNITION
 ITEM 
3+
Ammunition any Activation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)You activate 
spellstrike ammunition by casting a 
spell into the ammunition. The spell must be of a spell level the 
ammunition can hold and must afiect one or more targets. If the 
attack roll with the ammunition is a success, that target is afiected 
as if it were the target of the spell in addition to taking damage 
from the attack as normal. If the creature isn't a valid target for 
the spell, it still takes damage from the attack, but the spell fails.
The ammunition afiects only the target hit, even if the spell 
would normally afiect more than one target. The spell uses your 
spell roll and spell DC.
The maximum level of spell the ammunition can hold 
determines its item level and Price.
Level
 3; Price 7 gp; Maximum Spell Level
 1stLevel
 5; Price 16 gp; Maximum Spell Level
 2ndLevel
 7; Price 38 gp; Maximum Spell Level
 3rd
Level
 9; Price 75 gp; Maximum Spell Level
 4thLevel
 11; Price 150 gp; Maximum Spell Level
 5thLevel
 13; Price 325 gp; Maximum Spell Level
 6thLevel
 15; Price 700 gp; Maximum Spell Level
 7thLevel
 17; Price 1,600 gp; Maximum Spell Level
 8thLevel
 19; Price 4,000 gp; Maximum Spell Level
 9thSTAFF OF ABJURATION
 ITEM 
5+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)This intricately carved wooden stafi is warm to the 
touch and thrums with inner energy. You gain a +2 
circumstance bonus to checks to identify abjuration magic.
Type
 lesser; Level
 5; Price 160 gp; Maximum Charges 2
Ł shield (cantrip)
Ł alarm (level 1)

Ł feather fall (level 1)

Ł endure elements 
(level 2)

Ł resist energy
 (level 2)
Type
 standard; 
Level
 9; Price 700 gp; Maximum Charges 6
Ł alarm (level 3)

Ł dispel magic (level 3)

Ł dimensional anchor (level 4)

Ł resist energy
 (level 4)
Type
 greater; 
Level
 13; Price 3,000 gp; Maximum Charges 9
Ł banishment (level 5)

Ł endure elements
 (level 5)

Ł dispel magic (level 6)
Abjuration
MagicalConsumableMagicalTransmutation
Abjuration
Invested
MagicalStafi
Ł repulsion
 (level 6)
Craft Requirements 
Supply a casting of all listed spells. STAFF OF CONJURATION
 ITEM 
5+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)Carved animal and monster heads cap this stafi, 
and they seem to transform and animate when the 
stafi is used to summon creatures. You gain a +2 circumstance 
bonus to checks to identify conjuration magic.
Type
 lesser; Level
 5; Price 160 gp; Maximum Charges 2
Ł tanglefoot (cantrip)
Ł summon monster (level 1)

Ł unseen servant
 (level 1)

Ł obscuring mist (level 2)

Ł phantom steed (level 2)

Ł summon monster (level 2)
Type
 standard; 
Level
 9; Price 700 gp; Maximum Charges 6
Ł stinking cloud (level 3)

Ł summon monster (level 3)

Ł creation
 (level 4)

Ł phantom steed (level 4)

Ł summon monster (level 4)
Type
 greater; 
Level
 13; Price 3,000 gp; Maximum Charges 9
Ł black tentacles (level 5)

Ł summon monster (level 5)

Ł phantom steed (level 6)

Ł summon monster (level 6)
Craft Requirements 
Supply a casting of all listed spells. STAFF OF DIVINATION
 ITEM 
5+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)Numerous semi-precious gemstones emerge, 
seemingly at random, from the surface of this 
gnarled wooden stafi. Gazing into their interior planes and 
marveling at their inspiring inclusions grants you uncanny 
divinatory insight. You gain a +2 circumstance bonus to checks 
to identify divination magic.
Type
 lesser; Level
 5; Price 160 gp; Maximum Charges 2
Ł detect magic (cantrip)
Ł true strike (level 1)

Ł comprehend language
 (level 2)

Ł darkvision (level 2)

Ł see invisibility (level 2)
Type
 standard; 
Level
 9; Price 700 gp; Maximum Charges 6
Ł clairaudience 
(level 3)

Ł darkvision (level 3)

Ł clairvoyance 
(level 4)

Ł comprehend language
 (level 4)

Ł telepathy (level 4)
Type
 greater; 
Level
 13; Price 3,000 gp; Maximum Charges 9
Ł sending (level 5)

Ł prying eye 
(level 5)

Ł telepathy (level 6)

Ł true seeing (level 6)
Conjuration
Invested
MagicalStafiDivination
Invested
MagicalStafi409 Craft Requirements 
Supply a casting of all listed spells. STAFF OF ENCHANTMENT
 ITEM 
5+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)A mesmerizing transparent gemstone caps 
the head of this handsomely crafted wooden 
stafi. You gain a +2 circumstance bonus to checks to identify 
enchantment magic. Type
 lesser; Level
 5; Price 160 gp; Maximum Charges 2
Ł daze
 (cantrip)
Ł charm (level 1)

Ł command (level 1)

Ł hideous laughter (level 2)

Ł touch of idiocy (level 2)
Type
 standard; 
Level
 9; Price 700 gp; Maximum Charges 6
Ł paralyze
 (level 3)

Ł charm (level 4)

Ł confusion (level 4)

Ł paralyze
 (level 4)

Ł suggestion (level 4)
Type
 greater; 
Level
 13; Price 3,000 gp; Maximum Charges 9
Ł command (level 5)

Ł crushing despair (level 5)

Ł feeblemind (level 6)
Craft Requirements 
Supply a casting of all listed spells. STAFF OF EVOCATION
 ITEM 
5+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)This stafi is tapered at the base and carved into 
a gem-studded twist at the top. You gain a +2 
circumstance bonus to checks to identify evocation magic.
Type
 lesser; Level
 5; Price 160 gp; Maximum Charges 2
Ł ray of frost
 (cantrip)
Ł magic missile (level 1)

Ł shocking grasp
 (level 1)

Ł acid arrow
 (level 2)

Ł glitterdust
 (level 2)
Type
 standard; 
Level
 9; Price 700 gp; Maximum Charges 6
Ł lightning bolt (level 3)

Ł magic missile (level 3)

Ł fireball
 (level 4)

Ł weapon storm
 (level 4)
Type
 greater; 
Level
 13; Price 3,000 gp; Maximum Charges 9
Ł cone of cold (level 5)

Ł chain lightning (level 6)

Ł magic missile (level 5)

Ł wall of force
 (level 6)
Craft Requirements 
Supply a casting of all listed spells. STAFF OF FIRE
 ITEM 
3+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)This rugged wooden staff resembles a blackened 
and burned length of ashen wood. It smells 
EnchantmentInvested
MagicalStafiEvocation
Invested
 MagicalStafiEvocation
Invested
 MagicalStafifaintly of soot and glows from within as if lit by embers. You 
can spend an Interact action to touch the tip of this staff to a 
torch, tinder, or other highly flammable substances to ignite 
a flame. Type
 lesser; Level
 3; Price 60 gp; Maximum Charges 1
Ł produce flame
 (cantrip)
Ł burning hands (level 1)
Type
 standard; 
Level
 7; Price 360 gp; Maximum Charges 4
Ł burning hands (level 2)

Ł flaming sphere
 (level 2)

Ł flaming sphere
 (level 3)

Ł fireball
 (level 3)
Type
 greater; 
Level
 11; Price 1,400 gp; 
Maximum Charges 7
Ł fire shield 
(level 4)

Ł fireball
 (level 4)

Ł wall of fire
 (level 4)

Ł fireball
 (level 5)

Ł wall of fire
 (level 5)
Craft Requirements 
Supply a casting of all listed spells. STAFF OF HEALING
 ITEM 
3+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)Made of smooth white wood, this stafi is capped 
at each end with a golden cross adorned with a 
multitude of ruby cabochons. A 
stafi of healing adds an item bonus to the Hit Points you restore any time you cast the 
heal spell using your own spell slots, using charges from the stafi, or 
from channel energy.
Type
 minor; Level
 3; Price 60 gp; Maximum Charges 3
The item bonus to heal spells is +1.
Ł stabilize
 (cantrip)
Ł heal (level 1)
Type
 lesser; Level
 7; Price 360 gp; Maximum Charges 5
The item bonus to heal spells is +2.
Ł heal (level 2)

Ł restoration
 (level 2)

Ł restore senses
 (level 2)

Ł heal (level 3)

Ł remove disease
 (level 3)
Type
 standard; 
Level
 11; Price 1,400 gp; 
Maximum Charges 7
The item bonus to heal spells is +3.
Ł heal (level 4)

Ł restoration
 (level 4)

Ł breath of life
 (level 5)

Ł heal (level 5)

Ł remove disease
 (level 5)
Type
 greater; 
Level
 15; Price 6,500 gp; Maximum Charges 9
The item bonus to heal spells is +4.
Ł heal (level 6)

Ł restoration
 (level 6)

Ł restore senses
 (level 6)

Ł heal (level 7)

Ł regenerate
 (level 7)

Ł remove disease
 (level 7)
Craft Requirements 
Supply a casting of all listed spells. Invested
MagicalNecromancy
Stafi410STAFF OF ILLUSION
 ITEM 
5+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)This ornately designed metal stafi shines with 
precious inlays of gold. When you cast a spell from 
the stafi, the illusory image of something you desire fiashes 
across its surface. You gain a +2 circumstance bonus to checks 
to identify illusion magic. Type
 lesser; Level
 5; Price 160 gp; Maximum Charges 2
Ł ghost sound (cantrip)
Ł illusory disguise (level 1)

Ł illusory object (level 1)

Ł illusory creature 
(level 2)

Ł item facade (level 2)

Ł ventriloquism
 (level 2)
Type
 standard; 
Level
 9; Price 700 gp; Maximum Charges 6
Ł illusory disguise (level 3)

Ł item facade (level 3)

Ł illusory creature
 (level 4)

Ł veil
 (level 4)
Type
 greater; 
Level
 13; Price 3,000 gp; Maximum Charges 9
Ł illusory scene (level 5)

Ł veil
 (level 5)

Ł hallucination (level 6)

Ł mislead (level 6)
Craft Requirements 
Supply a casting of all listed spells. STAFF OF NECROMANCY 
 ITEM 
5+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)Hideous skull and bone motifs make this twisted 
stafi look grim and sinister. You gain a +2 
circumstance bonus to checks to identify necromancy magic.
Type
 lesser; Level
 5; Price 160 gp; Maximum Charges 2
Ł chill touch (cantrip)
Ł grim tendrils (level 1)

Ł ray of enfeeblement (level 1)

Ł deafness (level 2)

Ł gentle repose
 (level 2)
Type
 standard; 
Level
 9; Price 700 gp; Maximum Charges 6
Ł blindness (level 3)

Ł vampiric touch
 (level 3)

Ł grim tendrils (level 4)

Ł enervation
 (level 4)
Type
 greater; 
Level
 13; Price 3,000 gp; Maximum Charges 9
Ł cloudkill (level 5)

Ł gentle repose
 (level 5)

Ł grim tendrils (level 6)

Ł vampiric exsanguination
 (level 6)
Craft Requirements 
Supply a casting of all listed spells. STAFF OF POWER
 ITEM 
16
Price 10,000 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)This stafi of magically hardened wood is topped 
IllusionInvested
MagicalStafiInvested
MagicalNecromancy
StafiEvocation
Invested
MagicalStafiwith a silver sculpture depicting magical runic symbols. When 
used as a weapon, a 
stafi of power
 functions as a +3STafi. Voluntarily destroying a 
stafi of power
 unleashes an incredible 
blast as the arcane energy ripples out, then dissipates. While 
wielding the stafi, you can break it using an Interact action. This 
releases a 30-foot-burst magical explosion that deals 2d10 force 
damage per charge remaining in the stafi (Reflex DC 32 half, 
or no damage on a critical success), and you take full damage 
with no saving throw. A creature reduced to 0 Hit Points by this 
damage dies instantly; this is a death efiect.
This stafi can hold up to 11 charges.
Ł ray of enfeeblement
 (level 1)

Ł continual flame (level 2)

Ł levitate
 (level 3)

Ł globe of invulnerability
 (level 4)

Ł paralyze
 (level 4)

Ł magic missile (level 5)

Ł wall of force
 (level 6)

Ł cone of cold (level 7)

Ł fireball
 (level 7)

Ł lightning bolt (level 7)
Craft Requirements 
Supply a casting of all listed spells. STAFF OF TRANSMUTATION
 ITEM 
5+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)A glass orb atop this splendid metal stafi contains 
a quantity of flne sand that seems to shift and 
undulate on its own accord. You gain a +2 circumstance bonus to 
checks to identify transmutation magic.
Type
 lesser; Level
 5; Price 160 gp; Maximum Charges 2
Ł sigil (cantrip)
Ł fleet step (level 1)

Ł jump (level 1)

Ł enlarge
 (level 2)

Ł humanoid transformation
 (level 2)
Type
 standard; 
Level
 9; Price 700 gp; Maximum Charges 6
Ł feet to fins (level 3)

Ł jump (level 3)

Ł gaseous form (level 4)

Ł shape stone (level 4)
Type
 greater; 
Level
 13; Price 3,000 gp; Maximum Charges 9
Ł humanoid transformation
 (level 5)

Ł baleful polymorph (level 6)

Ł dragon form
 (level 6)

Ł flesh to stone (level 6)
 Craft Requirements 
Supply a casting of all listed spells. STONE BULLET 
 ITEM 
14
Price 600 gpAmmunition sling bulletActivation
  Operate Activation
This sling bullet looks like a petrifled serpent's eye. A creature hit 
by an activated 
stone bullet is subject to the effects of a 6th-level 
flesh to stone spell (DC 31). Craft Requirements
 Supply a casting of flesh to stone. Evocation
Invested
MagicalStafiInvested
MagicalStafiTransmutation
ConsumableMagicalTransmutation 
411STORM ARROW
 ITEM 
10
Price 125 gpAmmunition arrow
Activation
  Operate Activation
The head of this arrow is made from gleaming 
copper. When you hit a creature with an activated 
storm arrow, the arrow deals the weapon's normal damage and 
the creature is struck by a bolt of lightning and bufieted by raging 
winds. The target must attempt a DC 25 Reflex saving throw. If 
this arrow is shot from a weapon with the 
shock property, the save 
DC increases to 27, though the attack still doesn't benefit from the 
shock property itself.
Success The creature takes half damage and is not afiected 
by the winds.
Critical Success The creature takes no electricity damage and 
is not afiected by the winds. 
Failure
 The creature takes 4d12 electricity damage. It also 
takes a –2 circumstance penalty to ranged attack rolls for 
1 round and is hampered 10 while fiying for 1 round.
Critical Failure
 The creature takes double damage. It also 
takes a –2 circumstance penalty to ranged attack rolls for 
1 minute and is hampered 10 while fiying for 1 minute.
STURDY SHIELD
 ITEM 
2+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 for a light shield, 2 for a heavy shield
This shield has higher hardness than a nonmagical shield (see 
below) and can take 1 additional Dent before becoming broken.
Type
 expert light wooden; 
Level
 2; Price 35 gp; Hardness
 6 Type
 expert light steel; 
Level
 4; Price 90 gp; Hardness
 8 Type
 expert heavy wooden; 
Level
 5; Price 140 gp; Hardness 
8 Type
 expert heavy steel; 
Level
 7; Price 340 gp; Hardness 
10 Type 
master heavy steel; 
Level
 9; Price 675 gp; Hardness
 13 Type
 master light adamantine; Level
 10 (Uncommon); Price 1,000 gp; Hardness
 15; Craft Requirements
 Initial raw materials 
must include 300 gp of adamantine. Type
 master heavy adamantine; 
Level
 12 (Uncommon); Price 1,800 gp; 
Hardness
 18; Craft Requirements
 Initial raw materials 
must include 350 gp of adamantine. Type
 legendary heavy steel; 
Level
 17; Price 14,000 gp; Hardness
 17 Type
 legendary heavy adamantine; 
Level
 18 (Uncommon); Price 22,500 gp; Hardness
 21; Craft Requirements
 Initial raw materials 
must include 7,500 gp of adamantine.
SUNSTONE BEADS
 ITEM 
13 Price 400 gpMethod of Use affixed, weapon; 
Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 Your turn 
begins. Requirements
 You have the weapon specialization class feature 
and are legendary with the affixed weapon.
A string of sunstone beads
 is typically wrapped around the cross 
guard or shaft of a weapon. When you activate the beads, you 
can use a press action or activity as your first action this turn, 
even if you don't have a multiple attack penalty. 
AirConsumableElectricityEvocation
MagicalAbjuration
MagicalConsumableEvocation
MagicalTrinket
SWIFT BLOCK CABOCHON
 ITEM 
7 Price 44 gp
Method of Use affixed, shield; 
Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You take 
damage from a physical attack while you don't 
have the affixed shield raised.
This clear quartz cabochon attaches to the center of your shield. 
When you activate the cabochon, you can use the Shield Block 
reaction even if you hadn't raised the affixed shield.
THIRD EYE
 ITEM 
19 Price 40,000 gpMethod of Use worn; 
Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation, 
 Command Activation
When invested, this ornate crown and its incandescent gemstone 
meld into your head and take the form of a tattoo. This grants 
you extrasensory sight and allows you to read auras. No one but 
you can manipulate the 
third eye
 while it's invested by you—they 
pass right through it. Your heightened senses and ability to sense 
emotional auras grant you a +5 item bonus to Perception checks.
You gain the effects of a 9th-level 
detect magic spell, except 
you see the location of all auras within 30 feet, not just the 
strongest. If you use a Seek action to study a creature you can 
see, you can perceive an aura that conveys knowledge of that 
creature's health, including all conditions and aflictions it has 
and its relative percentage of remaining Hit Points.
Finally, you can activate the 
third eye 
to gain the effects of an 8th-level 
true seeing spell. THURIBLE OF REVELATION 
 ITEM 
5+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation
  Operate Activation
This brass censer that dangles on a length of chain 
is typically adorned with swirling Celestial text, though some 
versions are instead made of iron and feature Infernal or even 
Abyssal text. Regardless of its construction or adornment, it can 
be activated by burning a bit of incense worth at least 10 gp 
inside it. For the next hour, as long you are holding the thurible 
in one hand, you gain an item bonus to Religion checks, and you 
treat a critical failure to Read Scripture as a failure instead. 
Type
 standard; 
Level
 5; Price 140 gpThe thurible grants a +2 bonus. Type
 greater; 
Level
 16; Price 9,500 gpThe thurible grants a +4 bonus. While the thurible is activated, 
you can hold it up to your eyes as an Interact action. When you 
do so, you benefit from the efiect of 
true seeing for 1 minute as 
long as you continue to hold the thurible up to your eyes and 
peer through its smoke; after the minute of 
true seeing ends, the 
thurible's activation ends.
TRACKER'S GOGGLES
 ITEM 
5+
Method of Use worn, eyepiece; 
Bulk—These simple lenses of forest-green glass are 
bound in rough leather stitched with crude twine. 
While wearing these goggles, you gain an item bonus to Survival 
Abjuration
ConsumableMagicalTrinket
Divination
Invested
MagicalDivination
DivineInvested
Invested
MagicalTransmutation
412checks to Sense Direction and Track. If you fail a check to Track, 
you can try again after 30 minutes rather than an hour. 
Type
 standard; 
Level
 5; Price 135 gpThe goggles grant a +2 bonus. Type
 greater; 
Level
 13; Price 2,600 gpThe goggles grant a +4 bonus. If you fail a check to Track, you 
can try again after 15 minutes rather than an hour.
TRAVELER'S ANYflTOOL 
 ITEM 
6 Price 200 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk 1 Activation
  Operate Activation, 
 Focus Activation
Before it's activated, this item appears to be an ash rod capped with 
steel on either end. When activated, it transforms to any standard- 
or expert-quality item in Chapter 6THat has "repair kit" or "tool" in 
its name, following the mental speciflcations you imagine as part 
of your Focus Activation. This transforms the wooden portion into 
any haft and the metal caps into spades, hammer heads, or the 
like. You can return the item to its rod form with an Interact action.
TRUESIGHT POTION 
 ITEM 
14 Price 500 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
  Operate Activation
Upon drinking this clear, refreshing potion, you can 
see things as they actually are. You gain the benefits of a 7th-
level 
true seeing spell that has a spell roll of +21.
UNHOLY WATER
 ITEM 
1 Price 2 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LAn evil deity's curse lies upon this vial of water. You 
activate a vial of unholy water by throwing it as a 
Strike with a range of 20 feet; this doesn't require an expenditure 
of Resonance Points. Unholy water deals 1d6 evil damage and 
1 evil splash damage. Unholy water damages only creatures that 
have a weakness to evil damage, as well as all celestials.
VANISHING COIN
 ITEM 
9 Price 85 gpMethod of Use affixed, armor; 
Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You attempt 
a Stealth check for initiative, but haven't rolled yet.
Requirements
 You are a master in Stealth.
This copper coin dangles from a leather strip strung through a hole 
drilled into the coin's center. It's usually tied just below the throat 
on a suit of armor. Until it is activated, the coin becomes invisible 
for a few seconds every few minutes, but always at random 
intervals. When you activate the coin, you gain the benefits of a 
2nd-level 
invisibility spell until the end of your next turn.
VERDANT STAFF
 ITEM 
5+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk 1 Activation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)This living oak branch grows leaves in spring, 
changes color in autumn, and sheds its leaves 
MagicalTransmutation
ConsumableDivination
MagicalPotion
ConsumableDivineEvil
SplashConsumableIllusionMagicalTrinket
Divination
Invested
MagicalStafiin winter. You gain a +2 circumstance bonus to Nature checks to 
identify speciflc plants. Type
 standard; 
Level
 5; Price 160 gp; Maximum Charges 2 
Ł tanglefoot (cantrip)
Ł shillelagh (level 1, can target the 
verdant stafi
)
Ł barkskin (level 2)

Ł entangle (level 2)

Ł shape wood
 (level 2)

Ł tree shape
 (level 2)
Type
 greater; 
Level
 11; Price 1,400 gp; 
Maximum Charges 7
Ł wall of thorns
 (level 3)

Ł barkskin (level 4)

Ł speak with plants (level 4)

Ł plant form (level 5)

Ł wall of thorns
 (level 5)
Craft Requirements 
Supply a casting of all listed spells. VINE ARROW
 ITEM 
3 Price 6 gpAmmunition arrow
Activation
  Command Activation
Leafy stalks protrude from the shaft of this rustic arrow. When an 
activated 
vine arrow
 hits a creature, the arrow's shaft splits and 
grows, wrapping the target in vines. The creature is entangled 
for 2d4 rounds, or until it breaks free with a successful DC 17 
Athletics check.
VIPER ARROW
 ITEM 
4 Price 12 gpAmmunition arrow
Activation
  Command Activation
The shaft of this arrow is covered in flne green scales, and its 
iron head comes to a pair of points almost like fangs. When an 
activated 
viper arrow
 hits a creature, the arrow transforms into 
a viper. The arrow deals its normal damage, and the target is 
afiected by the viper's poison, as if it had been bitten. The viper 
then lands in an open space adjacent to the target. The viper has the summoned trait and acts at the end of your 
turn, even though you didn't use the Concentrate on a Spell 
action. It is under the GM's control, but it generally attacks the 
creature the arrow struck. The viper vanishes after 1 minute or 
when slain. Craft Requirements
 Supply a casting of summon monster.
VIPER'S FANG
 ITEM 
14 Price 550 gpMethod of Use affixed, weapon; 
Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You 
succeed at an Attack of Opportunity with the 
affixed weapon, and you haven't used a 
viper's fang
 since your 
last turn. Requirements
 You are a master with the affixed weapon.
Sometimes these trinkets are resin-strengthened viper skulls; 
other times they are carvings of a viper baring its teeth. When 
you activate the fang, the triggering Attack of Opportunity does 
not count against your reactions for the turn.
Conjuration
ConsumableMagicalConjuration
ConsumableMagical 
ConsumableEvocation
MagicalTrinket
413 VIRTUOSO'S INSTRUMENT 
 ITEM 
18
Price 23,000 gpMethod of Use held, 2 hands; Bulk 1 Activation
  Operate Activation
These legendary-quality instruments take the form of all 
varieties of handheld musical instruments. They bear exquisite 
designs and produce transcendent music that seems to travel 
farther and resonate longer. You gain a +5 item bonus to 
Performance while playing music with a 
virtuoso's
 instrument. Once per day, you can activate the instrument by playing it to 
produce the effects of an 8th-level 
charm spell. WAND OF HEAL
 ITEM 
2+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)Golden end caps on the ends of this stout wand of 
white wood are adorned with ruby cabochons. The gems seem 
to sparkle less brilliantly each time the wand is used. You can 
activate the wand to cast a 
heal spell of the indicated level. 
Type
 1st level; 
Level
 2; Price 27 gp; Spell Roll Cap 
+8 Type
 2nd level; 
Level
 4; Price 72 gp; Spell Roll Cap 
+10 Type
 3rd level; 
Level
 6; Price 180 gp; Spell Roll Cap 
+12 Type
 4th level; 
Level
 8; Price 405 gp; Spell Roll Cap
 +14 Craft Requirements 
Supply a casting of heal of the listed level.
WAND OF MAGIC MISSILE
 ITEM 
2+
Method of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk LActivation
 Cast a Spell (1 RP)A polished metal sphere tops this spiral-shaped 
wand. You can activate the wand to cast a 
magic missile spell of the indicated level. 
Type
 1st level; 
Level
 2; Price 27 gp; Spell Roll Cap 
+8 Type
 3rd level; 
Level
 6; Price 180 gp; Spell Roll Cap 
+12 Craft Requirements 
Supply a casting of magic missile of the listed level.
WAYFINDER
  ITEM 
2 Price 27 gpMethod of Use held, 1 hand; Bulk —Activation
  Command Activation
This compact compass features ancient technology repurposed 
to draw fantastic powers from the 
aeon stones the lost Azlanti empire held sacred thousands of years ago. It serves as a badge 
of office for agents of the Pathfinder Society and as a status 
symbol among adventurers of any stripe. A 
wayfinder
 functions as a compass, and you can activate it with a command word to 
cast the light cantrip on the wayfinder
.An indentation in the middle of the 
wayfinder
 can hold a 
single aeon stone (see page 380). Placing an 
aeon stone in this 
indentation provides you all the benefits of having the 
aeon 
stone orbiting your head, but protects the stone from being 
stolen or noticed as easily. You must invest the stone when 
you place it in the 
wayfinder
 in order to gains its benefits. 
An invested 
aeon stone slotted in a wayfinder
 also grants its 
resonant power. If you have more than one 
wayfinder
 with an 
invested 
aeon stone on your person at a given time, destructive 
Enchantment 
Invested
MagicalMagicalNecromancy
Wand
MagicalEvocation
Wand
Evocation
Magicalinterference from their resonance prevents you from gaining 
benefits from any of them.
WHISPER OF THE FIRST LIE
 ITEM 
17+
Method of Use worn; 
Bulk —This delicate necklace contains bottled whispers 
distilled from an astral source rumored to be 
connected to the first lie ever told. While wearing the necklace, 
you gain a +5 item bonus to Deception checks, and you can 
attempt to counteract effects that would force you to tell the 
truth or determine whether you are lying. Success on this 
counteract attempt lets you ignore the efiect, rather than 
removing the efiect entirely.
Type
 standard; 
Level
 17; Price 14,000 gpThe counteract level is 7 with a spell roll of +25
Type
 greater; 
Level
 20 (Uncommon); Price 60,000 gp; 
Activation
  Operate Activation, 
 Focus Activation, 
 Command Activation; 
Craft Requirements
 Supply a casting of 
fabricated truth. The counteract level is 9 with a spell roll of +30. You can 
activate the necklace by unstoppering the vial and releasing the 
lie, creating the efiect of a 
fabricated truth but forever thereafter 
reducing the item to the standard version.
WINGED BOOTS
 ITEM 
12 Price 2,000 gpMethod of Use worn, shoes; 
Bulk LActivation
  Command Activation, 
 Operate 
Activation
Made from soft leather, with delicate white wings attached to 
the heel, these boots are ensorcelled with powerful air magic. 
Whenever you fall while wearing these boots, you immediately 
gain the benefits of a feather fall
 spell. The boots won't trigger 
again for 10 minutes afterwards.
You can activate the boots by reciting the command word and 
clicking their heels together to cause the wings to fiap rapidly, 
granting you a fiy Speed of 30 feet for 1 minute.
WOLF FANG
 ITEM 
1 Price 4 gpMethod of Use affixed, armor; 
Bulk —Activation
  Focus Activation; 
Trigger
 You 
succeed at a Trip.
Requirements
 You are trained in Athletics.
This wolf canine is bound in a strip of leather and tied to a buckle 
or strap of a suit of armor. When you activate the fang, you deal 
bludgeoning damage equal to your Strength modifier to the 
target of your Trip, or you add your Strength modifier to any 
bludgeoning damage the Trip would already deal.
EnchantmentInvested
MagicalInvested
MagicalTransmutation 
ConsumableEvocation
MagicalTrinket
MORE WANDS
The wands listed on this page are only a small sample, using low-
level spells that are useful to have in wands. The full rules for 
making wands of other spells appear on page 380.
414 APPENDIX 1: TRAITS
The following is a list of traits and their effects in the game. Some traits have rules attached, while others are indicators of how other rules interact with an ability, item, 
or creature. A trait that has complex rules includes a page reference to the full breakdown of the trait elsewhere in this book. Abjuration 
effects and magic items with this trait are associated 
with the abjuration school of magic, typically involving 
protections, wards, or countermagic.
Acid
 effects with this trait deal acid damage. An item with Hardness 5 or lower takes 1 extra Dent from acid damage. 
Creatures with this trait have a magical connection to acid.
Activate (page 376)
 An action with this trait is used as part of the 
Activate an Item activity.
Additive
 Alchemists use additives. Feats with this trait allow you 
to spend actions to add special substances to bombs or elixirs. 
You can add only one additive to a single alchemical item, and 
attempting to add another spoils the item. You can typically 
take actions with the additive trait only when you're creating 
an infused alchemical item, and some can be used only with the Quick Alchemy action. Agile The multiple attack penalty you take on the second attack 
each turn with this weapon is –4 instead of –5, and –8 instead 
of –10 on the third and subsequent attacks in the turn.
Air effects with the air trait either manipulate or conjure air. 
Those that manipulate air have no efiect in a vacuum or an area 
without air. Creatures with this trait consist primarily of air or 
have a magical connection to the element.
Alchemical Alchemical items are powered by reactions of 
alchemical reagents, sometimes sparked by the user's Resonance 
Points. Alchemical items aren't magical, and they don't radiate a 
magical aura. Characters can Craft these items only if they have 
the Alchemical Crafting feat (see pages 162-163).
Alchemist This indicates abilities from the alchemist class.
Animal An animal is a creature with a relatively low Intelligence. 
They typically do not have an Intelligence ability score over
 3, can't speak languages, and can't be trained in Intelligence-
based skills. Animal Order
 This gives druids of the animal order an extra benefit.
Arcane
 This spell or magic item comes from an arcane spellcaster 
or from the arcane magical tradition.
Archetype (page 279)
 This feat belongs to an archetype.
Attached
 An attached weapon must be combined with another 
piece of gear in order to be used. The trait lists what type of 
item the weapon must be attached to. You must be wielding or 
wearing the item the weapon is attached to in order to attack 
with it. For example, shield spikes are attached to a shield, 
allowing you to attack with the spikes instead of a shield bash, 
but only if you're wielding the shield. An attached weapon is 
usually bolted onto or built into the item it's attached to, and 
typically an item can have only one weapon attached to it. An 
attached weapon can be removed from one item and attached 
to another with successful use of the Crafting skill. If an item is destroyed, its attached weapon can usually be salvaged.
Attack
 This ability grants an attack. For each attack you make 
beyond the first on your turn, you take a multiple attack 
penalty (see page 305).Auditory
 Auditory actions and effects rely on sound. An action 
with the auditory trait can be successfully performed only if the creature using the action can speak or otherwise produce 
the required sounds. A spell or efiect with the auditory trait has 
its efiect only if the target can hear it. This is different from a 
sonic efiect, which still afiects targets who can't hear it (such 
as deaf targets) as long as the efiect makes sound. Backstabber When you hit a flat-footed creature, this weapon 
deals 1 precision damage. The damage increases to 2 if the 
weapon is master quality or to 3 if it's legendary.
Backswing You can use this weapon's momentum from a miss 
to lead into your next attack. After missing with this weapon 
on your turn, you gain a +1 circumstance bonus to your next 
attack with this weapon before the end of your turn.
Barbarian This indicates abilities from the barbarian class.
Bard
 This indicates abilities from the bard class.
Bomb (page 359) Alchemical bombs are a type of alchemical 
item that must be thrown instead of activated. Most of them 
explode, dealing damage to their target and splash damage to 
other nearby creatures.
Cantrip (page 193) A spell with this trait can be cast at will and 
automatically heightens to the highest level spell you can cast.
Chaotic Chaotic effects often manipulate energy from chaos-
aligned Outer Planes and are anathema to lawful divine 
servants or divine servants of lawful deities. A creature with 
this trait is chaotic in alignment. An ability with this trait can 
be selected or used by chaotic creatures only.
Charge If you moved at least 10 feet on the action before your 
attack, add a circumstance bonus to damage for that attack 
equal to the number of damage dice for the weapon.
Cleric This indicates abilities from the cleric class.
Clumsy This armor's Dexterity modifier cap also applies to Reflex 
saves and on all Dexterity-based skill and ability checks that 
don't have the attack trait.
Cold effects with this trait deal cold damage. Creatures with this 
trait have a connection to magical cold.
Composition (page 64) Compositions are special spells available 
to bards.
Concentrate
 It takes a degree of mental concentration and 
discipline to use this type of action. Conjuration 
effects and magic items with this trait are associated 
with the conjuration school of magic, typically involving 
summoning, creation, teleportation, or moving things from 
place to place. Consecration
 A consecration spell enhances an area for an 
extended period of time. A given area can have only a single 
consecration efiect at a time. The new consecration efiect 
attempts to dispel the old one (see page 197).
Consumable An item with this trait can be used only once. Unless 
stated otherwise, the item is destroyed after activation, though 
in some cases, part of it might be recoverable for other purposes. 
415 For instance, while a potion is a consumable item, the vial the 
potion comes in is not destroyed after the potion is activated.
When a character creates consumable items, she can make 
them in batches of four, as described in the Craft activity (see 
page 148).Contact (page 360) This poison activates on touch.
Curse A curse is an efiect that places some long-term affliction on 
a creature. Curses are always magic and are typically the result 
of a spell or trap. Darkness (page 197) Darkness effects extinguish light in the 
area, including less powerful magical light. Darkness and light 
effects can negate one another.
Deadly On a critical hit, a weapon with this trait adds a weapon 
damage die of the listed size. This damage increases to two dice 
if the weapon is master quality and three dice if the weapon 
is legendary. For instance, a master-quality rapier deals 2d6 
additional piercing damage on a critical hit.
Death (page 296)
 A death efiect kills living creatures more easily.
Dedication (page 279)
 You must select a feat with this trait to 
start following an archetype.
Detection effects with this trait attempt to determine the 
presence or location of a person, thing, or aura. Most effects 
with the detection trait also have the divination trait. 
Dinosaur These reptiles have survived from prehistoric times.
Disarm You can use this weapon to Disarm with the Athletics skill 
even if you don't have a free hand. This uses the weapon's reach 
(if different from your own) and adds the weapon's item bonus 
to attack rolls (if any) as a bonus to the Athletics check. If you 
critically fail a check to Disarm using the weapon, you can drop 
the weapon to treat it as a normal failure. On a critical success, 
you still need a free hand if you want to take the item.
Disease effects with this trait apply one or more diseases. 
Diseases are typically afflictions (see pages 324–325).
Divination 
effects and magic items with this trait are associated 
with the divination school of magic, typically involving 
obtaining or transferring information.
Divine This spell or magic item comes from deiflc power, from a 
divine spellcaster, or from the divine magical tradition.
Downtime
 This ability can be used only during the downtime 
between adventures.
Druid This indicates abilities from the druid class.
Dwarf
 A creature with this trait is one of the dwarves, stout folk 
who often live underground and typically have darkvision. An 
ability with this trait can be used or chosen only by dwarves. A 
weapon with this trait is created and used by dwarves.
Earth effects with the earth trait either manipulate or conjure 
earth. Those that manipulate earth have no efiect in an area 
without earth. Creatures with this trait consist primarily of 
earth or have a magical connection to the element.
Electricity effects with this trait deal electricity damage. A 
creature with this trait has a magical connection to electricity.
Elf A creature with this trait is one of the elves, mysterious people 
with rich traditions of magic and scholarship who typically have low-light vision. An ability with this trait can be used or 
chosen only by elves. A weapon with this trait is created and 
used by elves.
Elixir (page 359) The alchemical items called elixirs must be drunk to be activated.
Emotion These effects alter a creature's emotions. effects with 
this trait always have the mental trait as well. Creatures with 
special training or that have mechanical or artiflcial intelligence 
are immune to emotion effects.
Enchantment effects and magic items with this trait are associated 
with the enchantment school of magic, typically involving mind 
control, emotional alteration, and other mental effects.
Evil
 Evil effects often manipulate energy from evil-aligned Outer 
Planes and are anathema to good divine servants or divine 
servants of good deities. A creature with this trait is evil in 
alignment. An ability with this trait can be selected or used by 
evil creatures only.
Evocation 
effects and magic items with this trait are associated 
with the evocation school of magic, typically involving energy 
and other elemental forces.
Extradimensional This efiect or item creates an extradimensional 
space. An extradimensional efiect placed inside another 
extradimensional space ceases to function until it is removed.
Fatal
 The fatal trait includes a die size. On a critical hit, all the 
weapon's damage dice increase to that die size instead of the 
normal size, and another weapon damage die of the listed size 
is added to the damage roll.
Fear
 Fear effects evoke the emotion of fear. effects with this trait 
always have the mental and emotion traits as well. 
Fighter This indicates abilities from the fighter class.
Finesse You can use your Dexterity modifier instead of your 
Strength modifier when making attack rolls with this melee 
weapon. You still use Strength when calculating damage.
Fire
 effects with the fire trait deal fire damage or either conjure or 
manipulate fire. Those that manipulate fire have no efiect in an 
area without fire. Creatures with this trait consist primarily of 
fire or have a magical connection to the element.
Force
 effects with this trait deal force damage or create objects 
made of pure magical force.
Forceful
 This weapon becomes more dangerous when you build 
up momentum. When you attack with the weapon more than 
once on your turn, the second attack adds a circumstance 
bonus to damage equal to the number of weapon damage dice, 
and each subsequent attack adds a circumstance bonus to 
damage equal to double the number of weapon damage dice.
Fortune (page 293)
 effects that improve your destiny or luck have 
the fortune trait. They usually change the results of your dice 
rolls. Fortune and misfortune cancel each other out.
Fragile 
If fragile armor takes a Dent, it's automatically broken.
 Free-Hand
 This weapon doesn't take up your hand, usually because 
it is built into your armor. A free-hand weapon can't be Disarmed. 
You can use the hand covered by your free-hand weapon to wield 
other items, perform manipulate actions, and so forth. You can't 
attack with a free-hand weapon if you're wielding anything in 
that hand or using the hand for something else. When you're not 
wielding anything and not using the hand, you can use abilities 
that require you to have a hand free as well as those that require 
you to be wielding a weapon in that hand. Each of your hands 
can have only one free-hand weapon in it.
416 General Any character, regardless of ancestry and class, can take 
a general feat as long as they meet the prerequisites.
Gnome A creature with this trait is one of the gnomes, small 
people skilled at magic who seek out new experiences and 
usually have low-light vision. An ability with this trait can be 
used or chosen only by gnomes. A weapon with this trait is 
created and used by gnomes.
Goblin A creature with this trait can come from multiple tribes 
of creatures, including small and canny goblins, militaristic 
hobgoblins, and hulking, savage bugbears. Goblins tend to 
have darkvision. An ability with this trait can be used or 
chosen only by goblins. A weapon with this trait is created 
and used by goblins.
Good Good effects often manipulate energy from good-aligned 
Outer Planes and are anathema to evil divine servants or divine 
servants of evil deities. A creature with this trait is good in 
alignment. An ability with this trait can be selected or used only by good creatures.
Half-Elf
 A creature with this trait is part human and part elf. An 
ability with this trait can be used or chosen only by half-elves.
Halfling A creature with this trait is one of the halflings, small 
people considered to be lucky and friendly wanderers. An 
ability with this trait can be used or chosen only by halflings. A 
weapon with this trait is created and used by halflings.
Half-Orc
 A creature with this trait is part human and part orc. An 
ability with this trait can be used or chosen only by half-orcs.
Healing A healing efiect restores a creature's body in some way, 
typically by restoring Hit Points, but sometimes by removing 
other debilitating effects.
Heritage Ancestry feats that have the heritage trait are feats that 
your character can select only at 1st level. Unlike with other 
feats, you cannot retrain your character to learn a heritage 
feat or to change her existing heritage feat at any point. Your 
character can never have more than one heritage feat. 
Human A creature with this trait is one of the humans, a diverse 
array of people known for their adaptability. An ability with 
this trait can be used or chosen only by humans.

Humanoid
 
Humanoid
 creatures reason and act much like humans. 
They typically stand upright and have two arms and two legs.
Illusion effects and magic items with this trait are associated 
with the illusion school of magic, typically involving false or 
magically altered sensory stimuli.
Infused An alchemical item with the infused trait doesn't cost 
its crafter any Resonance Points to activate (whether using 
Operate Activation or any other relevant action), though 
anyone else must spend Resonance Points to activate it 
normally. An infused item is potent for only 24 hours, after 
which it becomes inert. Alchemists create infused items.
Ingested (page 360) This poison activates when consumed.
Inhaled (page 360) This poison activates when inhaled.
Injury (page 360) This poison activates on a damaging Strike.
Invested
 An item that a character needs to prepare by investing 
it with a Resonance Point (see page 377) has the invested trait. 
Most invested items are worn, like armor, clothing, or jewelry. 
None of the magical effects of the item apply if the character hasn't invested it, though the character still gains any normal 
benefits from the physical item (like a hat keeping rain ofi a 
character's head).
Lawful
 Lawful effects often manipulate energy from law-aligned 
Outer Planes and are anathema to chaotic divine servants or 
divine servants of chaotic deities. A creature with this trait is 
lawful in alignment. An ability with this trait can be selected or 
used by lawful creatures only.
Leaf Order
 This gives druids of the leaf order an extra benefit.
Light (page 197) Light effects generate light. Darkness and light 
effects can negate one another.
Lingual A lingual efiect depends on language comprehension. A 
lingual efiect that targets a creature works only if the target 
understands the language you are using. effects with the 
lingual trait are also likely to have the auditory trait.
Litany Litanies are special champion powers, typically used by 
paladins and requiring a single action. Usually a creature you 
target with a litany becomes bolstered against all of your litanies.
Magical Magical items are imbued with magical energies. Each 
one radiates a magic aura infused with its dominant school 
of magic (abjuration, conjuration, divination, enchantment, 
evocation, illusion, necromancy, or transmutation). A character 
can craft these items only if she has the Magical Crafting feat 
(see page 168).Some items are closely tied to a particular tradition of magic. 
In these cases, the item has the arcane, divine, occult, or primal 
trait instead of the magical trait. Any of these traits indicates 
that the item is magical.
Manipulate
 You must physically manipulate an item or make 
gestures to use this type of action. Creatures without a suitable 
appendage cannot perform actions with this trait. Manipulate 
actions often trigger reactions.
Mechanical A hazard with this trait—typically a trap—is a 
constructed physical object. Mental Mental spells afiect the target's mind. They have no efiect 
on mindless creatures or objects. Mental can also appear as a 
damage type for spells that deal damage through psychic
 trauma. Metamagic Metamagic feats trigger when you begin casting a spell 
and typically require you to spend an additional spellcasting 
action to alter the spell's effects. You can't use metamagic feats 
if adding an action to the spell would make the spell require 
more actions than you have remaining on your turn. Because 
most metamagic feats have the same trigger, you usually can't 
use more than one metamagic feat per spell.
Mindless A mindless creature has either programmed or 
rudimentary mental attributes. Most, if not all, of their mental 
ability scores are 1. They are immune to all mental effects. 
Minion A creature with this trait can use only 2 actions per turn 
and can't use reactions. A minion acts on your turn in combat 
when you spend an action to issue it verbal commands (this 
action has the concentrate trait). If given no commands, minions 
use no actions except to defend themselves or to escape obvious 
harm. If left unattended for at least 1 minute, mindless minions 
don't act, whereas intelligent ones act as they please.
Misfortune (page 293) The misfortune trait appears on spells that 
cause you ill fortune. They usually change the results of your 
dice rolls. Fortune and misfortune can cancel each other out.
417 Monk This indicates abilities from the monk class. If this trait 
appears on a weapon, monks can use that weapon with their 
abilities that normally require unarmed attacks.
Morph Spells that slightly alter a creature's form have the morph 
trait. You can be afiected by multiple morph spells at once, 
but if you morph the same body part more than once, the first 
morph efiect is immediately dismissed.
Your morph effects can also be dismissed if you are 
polymorphed and the polymorph efiect invalidates or overrides 
your morph efiect. For instance, a morph that sharpened your 
flngers into claws would be dismissed if you polymorphed into a 
form that lacked hands, and a morph that gave you wings would 
be dismissed if you polymorphed into a form that had wings of 
its own (however, if your new form lacked wings, you'd keep the 
wings from your morph). The GM determines which morph and 
polymorph effects can be used together and which can't.
Move
 This action involves moving from one space to another 
in some way. Attacks of Opportunity and other reactions are 
triggered when a creature within a certain distance of the 
reactor moves from one space to another (see page 311). 
Multiclass (page 279) Archetypes with the multiclass trait 
represent diversifying your training into another class's 
specialties. You can't select a multiclass archetype's dedication 
feat if you are a member of the class of the same name.
Mutagen (pages 359–360) 
The alchemical elixirs called mutagens change the imbiber's mental and physical characteristics.
Necromancy 
These effects and magic items are associated with the 
necromancy school of magic, typically involving life and death.
Negative
 effects with this trait heal undead creatures with 
negative energy, deal negative damage to living creatures, or 
manipulate negative energy.
Noisy This armor's check penalty to Stealth checks increases by 1.
Nonlethal All attacks made with this weapon are nonlethal (see 
page  294) and are used to knock creatures unconscious instead 
of killing them.  
Oath 
Feats with the oath trait always add an additional tenet to the 
paladin's code, and a paladin can usually have only one such feat.
Occult This spell or magic item comes from an occult spellcaster 
or from the occult magical tradition.
Oil (page 378) An oil is a liquid magic item applied to the surface of an item or creature.
Open You can use an action with the open trait only if you haven't 
used an action with the attack or open trait yet this turn.
Orc
 A creature with this trait is one of the orcs, green-skinned 
people with a reputation as warmongers. Orcs tend to have 
darkvision. An ability with this trait can be used or chosen only 
by orcs (including half-orcs). A weapon with this trait is created 
and used by orcs and half-orcs.
Paladin This indicates abilities from the paladin class.
Parry This weapon can be used defensively to block attacks. 
While wielding this weapon, you can spend an action to 
position your weapon defensively, gaining a +1 circumstance 
bonus to AC until the start of your next turn.
Plant Vegetable creatures have the plant trait. They are 
distinct from normal plants. Magical effects with this trait 
manipulate or conjure plants or plant matter in some way. 
418THose that manipulate plants have no effect in a dead area 
with no plants. Poison
 These effects deliver a poison or deal poison damage. An 
item with the poison trait is poisonous and might cause an affliction (see pages 324–325).
Polymorph
 These effects transform the target into a new form. 
Neither a creature nor an object can be under the efiect of more 
than one polymorph efiect at a time. If a creature or object 
comes under the efiect of a second polymorph efiect, the second polymorph efiect dispels the first one. Unless otherwise stated, spells with the polymorph trait don't allow the target to 
take on the appearance of a speciflc creature, but rather just a 
generic creature of a general type or ancestry.
Positive
 effects with this trait heal living creatures with positive 
energy, deal positive energy damage to undead, or manipulate 
positive energy.
Possession
 effects with this trait allow a creature to project its 
mind and spirit into a target. A creature immune to mental 
effects can't use a possession efiect. While possessing a target, 
a possessor's true body is unconscious (and can't wake up 
normally), unless the possession efiect allows the creature to 
physically enter the target. Whenever the target takes damage, 
the possessor takes half that much damage as mental damage.
A possessor loses the benefits of any of its active spells 
or abilities, though it gains the benefits of the target's active 
spells and abilities. A possessor can use any of the target's 
abilities that are purely physical, and it can't use any of its 
own abilities except spells and purely mental abilities. The GM 
decides whether an ability is purely physical or purely mental. 
A possessor uses the target's attack modifier, AC, Fortitude 
save, Reflex save, Perception, and physical skills, and its own 
Will save, mental skills, and spell DC; this includes any invested 
items where applicable (the possessor's invested items apply 
when using its own values, and the target's invested items 
apply when using the target's values). A possessor gains no 
benefit from casting spells that normally afiect only the caster 
since it isn't in its own body.
The possessor must use its own actions and reactions to 
make the possessed creature act.
If a possessor reaches 0 Hit Points through any 
combination of damage to its true body and mental 
damage from the possession, it becomes dying as normal 
and the possession ends immediately. If the target reaches 
0 Hit Points first, the possessor can choose to either go 
unconscious with the body and continue the possession 
or end the effect as a free action and return to its body. If 
the target dies, the possession ends immediately and the 
possessor is stunned for 1 minute. Potent (page 345)
 When a character Invests an Item with this 
trait, the item improves one of that character's ability scores, 
either increasing it to 18 or increasing it by 2, whichever grants 
the higher ability score. A potent item grants this benefit 
only the first time it's invested within a 24-hour period, and a 
character can benefit from only one potent item at a time.
Potion (page 378)
 A creature activates and consumes these 
magical liquids by drinking them as an Operate Activation.
Prediction
 effects with this trait determine what is likely to 
happen in the near future. Most predictions are divinations.
Press
 An action with the press trait can be used only if you are 
currently afiected by a multiple attack penalty. Some actions 
with the press trait also grant an efiect on a failure. effects 
on a failure can be gained only if the action took a –4 multiple 
attack penalty or worse. The effects that are added on a failure 
don't apply on a critical failure. If your press action succeeds or 
critically succeeds but deals no damage and causes no other 
effects (typically due to resistance), you can apply the failure 
efiect instead. Prestige (page 279)
 Archetypes with the prestige trait represent the 
pinnacle of power and ability in a narrow fleld of expertise. You 
can never have more than one prestige archetype dedication feat. 
Primal This spell or magic item comes from the untamed forces 
of nature, from a primal spellcaster, or from the primal 
magical tradition. Propulsive
 You add half your Strength modifier to damage rolls 
with a propulsive ranged weapon so long as your Strength 
modifier is not negative. If you have a negative Strength 
modifier, you add your full Strength modifier instead.
Rage You must be raging to use abilities with the rage trait, and they 
end automatically when you stop raging. Barbarians can
 Rage. Ranger This indicates abilities from the ranger class.
Reach
 This weapon is long and can be used to attack creatures 
up to 10 feet away instead of only adjacent creatures. For 
creatures that already have reach with the limb or limbs that 
wield the weapon, the weapon increases their reach by 5 feet.
Revelation
 effects with this trait see things as they truly are. 
Most revelations are divinations.
Rogue
 This indicates abilities from the rogue class.
Scroll (page 378)
 A spell can be written on a piece of parchment 
called a scroll to be cast later.
Scrying A scrying efiect lets you see, hear, or otherwise get 
sensory information from a distance from a sensor or apparatus, 
rather than your own eyes and ears.
Secret (page 293)
 This trait indicates that the GM rolls the check 
for this ability in secret.
Shadow
 Magic with this trait manipulates or depends on shadows 
or the energy of the Shadow Plane.
Shove
 You can use this weapon to Shove with the Athletics skill 
even if you don't have a free hand. This uses the weapon's reach 
(if different from your own) and adds the weapon's item bonus 
to attack rolls (if any) as a bonus to the Athletics check. If you 
critically fail a check to Shove using the weapon, you can drop 
the weapon to treat the outcome as a normal failure. 
Skill A feat with the skill trait improves your skills and their uses 
or gives you new uses for a skill.
Snare (page 357)
 Traps typically made by rangers, snares follow 
special rules that allow them to be constructed quickly and 
used on the battlefleld.
Sonic An efiect with the sonic trait functions only if it makes sound, 
meaning it has no efiect in an area of 
silence or in a vacuum. This 
is different than an auditory spell, which is efiective only if the 
target can hear it. A sonic efiect might deal sonic damage. Sorcerer
 This indicates abilities from the sorcerer class.
419 Special (page 354)
 A material with the special trait is harder to 
find or work than normal. They can be substituted for base 
materials when you are constructing items.
Spellcasting This action is used as part of the Cast a Spell activity.
Splash (page 359) When a character uses a thrown weapon with 
the splash trait (such as an alchemical bomb or holy water), 
she doesn't add her Strength modifier to the damage roll. A 
splash weapon can deal splash damage in addition to its normal 
damage. If an attack with a splash weapon fails, succeeds, or 
critically succeeds, all creatures within 5 feet of the target take 
the indicated amount of splash damage. On a failure (but not a 
critical failure), the target of the attack also takes the splash 
damage. Splash damage is not multiplied on a critical hit. Stafl (page 379)
 This magic item holds spells of a particular 
theme. A spellcaster who has invested a stafi can expend their 
own spells or charges held in the stafi to cast the spells. 
Stance A stance is a general combat strategy that you enter by 
using an action with the stance trait. You can enter a stance 
only in encounter mode. A stance lasts until you get knocked 
out, until its requirements (if any) are violated, or until you 
enter a new stance, whichever comes first.
Storm Order
 This gives druids of the storm order an extra benefit.
Summoned (page 195) A creature called by way of a conjuration 
spell or efiect gains the summoned trait. A summoned creature 
can't summon other creatures, create things of value, or cast 
spells that require an expensive material component or special 
focus. It can use only 2 actions on its turn, and it can't use 
reactions. It takes its actions when you flnish Casting the Spell 
and when you spend an action to Concentrate on a Spell.
Summoned creatures can be banished by various spells 
and effects and are automatically banished if reduced to 0 Hit 
Points or if the spell that calls them is dismissed.
Sweep
 This weapon makes wide-sweeping or spinning attacks, 
making it easier to attack multiple enemies. When you attack 
with this weapon, you gain a +1 circumstance bonus to your 
attack roll if you already attempted an attack this turn against 
a creature other than the target of this attack.
Teleportation
 Teleportation effects allow you to instantaneously 
move from one point in space to another. Teleportation does not 
usually trigger reactions based on movement.
Thrown
 You can throw this weapon as a ranged attack. A thrown 
weapon adds your Strength modifier to damage just like a melee 
weapon does. When this trait appears on a melee weapon, it 
also includes the range in feet. Ranged weapons with this trait 
can be thrown at a range equal to the weapon's specifled range. 
Totem
 Abilities with the totem trait require a speciflc totem, and you 
lose access to them temporarily when you perform actions that 
are anathema to your totem. Barbarian characters choose totems.
Transmutation 
effects and magic items with this trait are associated 
with the transmutation school of magic, typically involving 
changing the qualities or form of one thing into another.
Trap
 A hazard or item with this trait is purposefully placed or 
constructed to hinder interlopers. Trinket (pages 379)
 The consumable magic items called trinkets must be aflxed to items before they can be activated. Most 
require the user to have a special feat or skill to Activate them.
Trip
 You can use this weapon to Trip with the Athletics skill even 
if you don't have a free hand. This uses the weapon's reach (if 
different from your own) and adds the weapon's item bonus 
to attack rolls (if any) as a bonus to the Athletics check. If you 
critically fail a check to Trip using the weapon, you can drop 
the weapon to treat the outcome as a normal failure.
Twin
 These weapons are used as a pair, each complementing 
the other. When you are wielding two of the same weapon 
with this trait and attack with one of them, if you already 
attacked with the other weapon this turn, you add a 
circumstance bonus to the damage roll equal to the weapon's 
number of damage dice. For instance, if you attacked with a 
twin weapon in your right hand with your first action, you 
would gain this bonus to damage when you attack with a 
matching twin weapon in your left hand for your second 
action. On your third action, an attack with either weapon 
would receive this bonus, since you'd already attacked with 
both. The weapons must be of the same type to benefit from 
this trait, but they don't need to be the same quality or have 
the same runes. Two-Hand
 This weapon can be wielded with two hands. This 
increases its weapon damage die to the indicated value. If this 
trait applies to a magic weapon, the extra weapon damage 
dice from it being a 
magic weapon
 also increases to the 
indicated damage die while it's being wielded with two hands.
Unarmed An unarmed attack is made using your body rather than 
a manufactured weapon. An unarmed attack isn't a weapon, 
though it's categorized with weapons for weapon tables and 
weapon groups, and it might have weapon traits. Because it's 
a part of your body, an unarmed attack can't be Disarmed. It 
also doesn't take up a hand, though a flst or other grasping 
appendage follows the same rules as a free-hand weapon.
Undead Once living, these creatures were infused after death 
with negative energy and soul-corrupting evil magic. When 
reduced to 0 Hit Points, an undead creature is destroyed. 
Undead creatures are damaged by positive energy, are healed 
by negative energy, and don't benefit from healing effects.
Versatile
 A versatile weapon can be used to deal a different type 
of damage than the type listed in the damage entry. This trait 
indicates the alternate damage type. For instance, a piercing 
weapon that has versatile S can be used to deal piercing or 
slashing damage. You choose the damage type each time you 
make an attack.
Virulent (page 325) This affliction is harder to remove.
Visual A visual spell can afiect only creatures that can see it.
Volley
 This ranged weapon is less efiective at close distances. 
Your attacks take a –2 penalty against targets that are at a 
distance within the number of feet listed.  Wand (page 380)
 A wand is a stick or similar object containing a 
spell that can be cast a certain number of times.
Water
 effects with the water trait either manipulate or conjure 
water. Those that manipulate water have no efiect in an area 
without water. Creatures with this trait consist primarily of 
water or have a magical connection to the element.
Wild Order
 This gives druids of the wild order an extra benefit.
Wizard
 This indicates abilities from the wizard class.
420
The following is a list of some of the game's most common 
terms, any abbreviations or alternative names for those 
game terms, and brief explanation of the term's definition.
Ability An ability is anything you can do that provides an exception 
to the basic rules of play. Ability is most often used as a general 
term to refer to rules that could come from a number of sources 
without restricting them to a particular source, so "an ability 
that gives you a bonus to damage rolls" could be a feat, a spell, 
a class feature, and so on.
Ability Boost An ability boost allows you to increase one of your 
ability scores. When you gain an ability boost, you increase 
one of your ability scores by 2, or by 1 if the ability score was 
already 18 or higher. You gain several ability boosts during 
character creation and more at levels 5, 10, 15, and 20. Some 
ability boosts must go to a particular score, and others can be 
spent as you choose. See page 18 for more.
Ability Flaw
 An ability flaw decreases one of your ability scores 
by 2 and usually comes from your ancestry (see page 18). 
Ability Modifier An ability modifier is the value added to or 
subtracted from your roll based on your ability score. 
Ability Score
 Your character has six ability scores: Strength, 
Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma. 
These scores represent your raw potential and basic attributes. 
The higher the score, the greater your potential in tasks related 
to that ability score. Because ability scores are used only to 
track your growth and calculate your ability modifiers, most 
adversaries omit ability scores and instead list only the derived 
ability modifiers. Learn more on page 18.
Action
 () An action is a discrete task performed during your 
turn that provides a discrete efiect, possibly requiring a check 
on your part to determine the result. Actions can be used to 
accomplish a variety of things, such as moving, attacking, 
casting some part of a spell, or interacting with an item or object. Most creatures can take up to 3 actions during their 
turn. Learn more on page 296.
Activity
 An activity is an ability that uses 1 or more of a creature's 
actions to perform a special efiect for the activity as a whole, 
rather than an efiect for each action used. Activities that use 
2 actions start with this symbol: . Activities that use 3 
actions start with this symbol: . See page 296. Affiiction
 An affliction can afiect a creature for a long time, 
progressing through different and often increasingly 
debilitating stages. The most common kinds of afflictions are 
curses, diseases, and poisons. See pages 324–325.
Alignment Alignment represents a creature's basic moral and 
ethical attitude. Alignment has two axes: the first axis describes 
whether a creature is lawful, chaotic, or neutral on that axis, 
and the second describes whether the creature is good, evil, or 
neutral on that axis. A creature's full alignment is a combination 
of their alignment on each axis in order, so a creature lawful 
on the first axis and good on the second axis is lawful good 
(abbreviated LG). A character neutral along both axes is called 
true neutral (abbreviated as just N, rather than NN). See page 
16 for more.
Ancestry An ancestry is the broad family of people to which a 
character or other creature belongs. An ancestry determines a 
character's ancestry Hit Points, starting languages, Speed, and 
senses. An ancestry also gives access to a set of ancestry feats. 
Ancestries and their rules appear in Chapter 2.Arcane 
Arcane magic is the tradition that blends material and 
mental essences, understanding the magic of the universe 
based on experimentation and measurable effects. 
Archetype
 An archetype is an optional group of special feats that 
you can take in place of your regular class feats to give your 
character a different theme or suite of abilities. Learn more on 
page 279.Armor Class (AC)
 All creatures have an Armor Class. This score 
represents how hard it is to hit and damage a creature. It typically 
serves as the Diflculty Class for hitting a creature with an attack. 
Your Armor Class is equal to 10 plus your Dexterity modifier (up 
to your armor's Dexterity modifier cap), your proficiency modifier 
with your armor, and your armor's item bonus to AC, in addition to 
any other bonuses and penalties (see page 176).Attack
 When a creature attacks another, it makes an attack roll 
against the target's Armor Class. Most attack rolls are made  
using the Strike action, but the attack trait sometimes appears 
on spells or other abilities (such as Shove). Your attack modifier 
is equal to your proficiency modifier with your weapon plus 
your Strength modifier for a melee weapon (unless the 
weapon's entry says otherwise) or Dexterity modifier for a 
ranged weapon, plus any item bonus from the weapon and any 
other bonuses and penalties. Aura
 An aura automatically afiects creatures or objects within 
a certain radius of the source creature without that creature 
needing to spend an action. Its effects are applied at a certain 
time, such as at the end of each creature's turn.
 Background
 A background represents a profession or other 
signiflcant aspect of your life before becoming an adventurer. 
Backgrounds give you ability boosts, signature skills, and feats. 
Learn more on page 38.
Bonus Bonuses are positive numbers that are added to a score 
or a roll. They come in three types: item, conditional, and 
circumstance. If you gain multiple bonuses of a given type, 
you apply only the highest bonus, and ignore the others. See 
page 291 for more. See "modifier" and "penalty" for the other 
numbers that afiect your rolls.
Bulk Bulk is a measure of how much you are carrying. If you are 
carrying total Bulk equal to or more than 5 plus your Strength 
modifier, you are encumbered. You can't carry Bulk that exceeds 
10 plus your Strength modifier. Learn more on pages 174–175.
Cantrip Cantrips are simple spells that a spellcaster can cast as 
many times as she likes, and they are always heightened to the 
maximum spell level she can cast in that class (or half her level 
rounded up, if the cantrip is not tied to a spellcasting class, 
such as an innate spell). See page 193 for more information.
Character The term character is synonymous with creature (see 
page 421) but is more often used to refer to player characters 
and nonplayer characters than monsters.
APPENDIX 2: GLOSSARY
421 Charisma (Cha) This mental ability score measures your charm 
and force of personality.
Check A check is a type of roll that involves rolling a 1d20, adding 
your modifier, and comparing the result to a DC. Attack rolls, 
saving throws, Perception checks, and skill checks are the most 
common types of checks. Learn more on page 290.
Class Classes represent the main adventuring profession chosen 
by a character. A class determines a character's starting 
proflciencies in weapons, armor, spells (if any), and Perception, 
the character's signature skills, and the Hit Points a character 
gains when gaining a new level, and it gives access to a set of 
class features and feats. Classes appear in Chapter 3.
Class DC
 Your class DC = 10 + your level + your key ability modifier. 
Nonspellcasters use their class DC as the DC for many of their class features. 
Class Feature 
Any ability granted by a class is a class feature. These 
mainly consist of feats and other abilities speciflc to the class.
Common The common rarity indicates that an ability, item, or 
spell is available to all players who meet the prerequisites for 
it. If something is common, its level is indicated in black (the 
darkest shading of the rarities).Condition An ongoing efiect that changes how you can act or that 
alters some of your statistics is called a condition. These often 
come from spells. Some frequently occurring conditions are 
called basic conditions, which appear on page 320.Constitution (Con) This physical ability score measures your 
toughness and durability.
Creature
 A creature is an active participant in the story or 
world. This includes player characters, nonplayer characters, 
and monsters. Critical Failure 
A critical failure is a degree of success that results 
from a check result that is 10 or more lower than the Diflculty 
Class, or is a result of a natural 1 (as long as that natural 1 does 
not result in a roll that is higher than the Diflculty Class). A 
critical failure is also a failure, though a critical failure entry 
supersedes the failure entry if present.
Critical Success A critical success is a degree of success that 
results from a check result that is 10 or more higher than 
the Diflculty Class, or a result of natural 20 (as long as that 
natural 20 does not result in a roll that is lower than the 
Diflculty Class). A critical success is also a success, though a 
critical success entry supersedes the success entry if present.
Degree of Success 
The four degrees of success are critical success, 
success, failure, and critical failure. Checks produce one of 
these four outcomes depending on the check result compared 
to the Diflculty Class (DC). Learn more on page 292.
Deity Deities are powerful entities that live beyond the world, who 
grant power in the form of spells to their truly devoted believers. 
Clerics must select a deity at 1st level, but most characters pick 
a deity to venerate in the course of their adventuring career. You 
can find descriptions of the deities on page 288.Dexterity (Dexterity)
 This physical ability score measures your 
agility and adroitness.
Difficulty Class (DC) The number that a check result must meet 
or exceed to determine if a check is successful is called the 
Difficulty Class. Some DCs also go by other names, like 
Armor Class. When you attempt a check against another 
creature, you must compare your result to a DC of 10 plus 
its relevant check modifier. For example, if you are sneaking 
past a guard, you would roll your Stealth check and compare 
the result to the guard's Perception DC (see page 291).
Divine Divine magic is the tradition that blends spiritual and vital 
essences, steeped in faith, the unseen, and belief in power from 
beyond the Material Plane. 
Downtime 
Downtime is a mode of play that covers long spans 
of time quickly, breaking down activities day by day or in 
even longer spans. When not adventuring, characters are in 
downtime. Learn more on page 318.
Effect An efiect is the result of an ability, though an ability's efiect 
is sometimes contingent on the result of a check or other roll.
Encounter Within encounter mode, play is broken down into 
6-second rounds with extremely precise rules for who acts 
when and to what extent. Encounter mode is used for combat, 
intense debates, and similar conflicts where time is of the 
essence. Learn more on page 304.
Enhancement Enhancements are extra effects added to the 
normal success and critical success effects of a Strike as long as the Strike deals damage. Experience Points (XP)
 As a player character overcomes 
challenges, defeats monsters, and completes quests, she gains 
Experience Points. Once she reaches 1,000 XP, she gains a 
level, subtracts 1,000 from her XP, and continues accumulating 
XP. Learn more on page 278.
Exploration 
Within exploration mode, play is more free-form,  
using abstracted tactics rather than precise action-by-action 
accounting. Exploration mode is used for travel and exploration, 
and where in-world time is more fiuid and passes more quickly. 
Learn more on page 316.
Failure 
A failure is a degree of success that results from a check 
result lower than the Diflculty Class or a result of natural 1THat  
still meets or exceeds the Diflculty Class. If a check has no 
failure entry, that means there is no efiect on a failure.
Feat
 A feat is an ability that a character selects based on his 
ancestry, background, class, general training, or skill training. 
Flat Check
 A flat check is a d20 roll that measures pure chance. A  
flat check can't have any modifiers applied to it (see page 292).
 Free Action () Free actions are triggered abilities that you can 
use any time the trigger occurs. There's no limit to the number 
of free actions you can take per round, but you can't use more 
than one on the same trigger. Learn more on page 297.
 Free Boost
 You can increase an ability score of your choice with 
this type of ability boost. Game Master (GM) The Game Master is the player who controls 
all of the elements of the story and adjudicates the rules, while 
cooperating with the other players to craft a fun game.
Hazard 
Hazards are non-creature dangers that adventurers 
encounter during their journeys, including environmental 
hazards, haunts, and traps. Simple hazards have a one-
time efiect, but negotiating a complex hazard takes place in 
encounter mode, wherein the hazard has a speciflc routine.
Hit Points (HP)
 Hit Points represent the amount of punishment a 
creature can take before it dies or begins dying. Damage decreases 
422 Hit Points on a 1-to-1 basis, while healing restores Hit Points at the 
same rate. Learn more on page 294.
Initiative
 At the start of an encounter, all creatures involved roll 
initiative to determine the order in which participants will act 
during combat. The higher the result of the initiative roll, the 
earlier a creature gets to act. Usually you'll roll using your 
Perception skill for initiative, but you might roll a different skill 
check instead, or even another kind of check. Learn more on 
page 304.Innate Spell 
An innate spell is one granted not by your class, but 
by your ancestry or a magic item. Learn more on pages 192–193.
Intelligence (Int) This mental ability score measures your reason 
and intellect. Item An item is an object that you carry, hold, or use. Armor, 
weapons, gear, and magic items are all items. Items 
sometimes grant an item bonus to a certain type of check 
associated with the item. Standard nonmagical items are in 
the Equipment chapter (page 174), and magic items are in 
Chapter 11.Key Ability 
Your key ability is the ability score you use to 
determine your class DC as well as your spell roll modifier 
(and thus spell DC) if you are a spellcaster.
Level
 Level is a number that measures something's overall power. 
A character has a level (sometimes called a character level when 
necessary for clarity), ranging from 1 to 20, representing her 
overall level of experience. Monsters, hazards, and afflictions also 
have levels from 1 to 20THat measure their power and danger. A 
magic item's level (also from 1 to 20) indicates its power and its 
suitability as treasure for a group or character. Spells have levels 
ranging from 1 to 10THat measure their power.
Modifier Modifiers can be either negative or positive and adjust a 
roll. Most d20 rolls add an ability modifier based on an ability 
score and a proficiency modifier based on your level of training. 
See page 290 for more, and see "bonus" and "penalty" for the 
other numbers that afiect your rolls.
Monster A monster is a creature that is typically inhuman and 
serves to thwart the PCs in some ways. While some monsters 
can become beneflcial, or even friendly, those types of monsters 
are exceptions in most games.
Multiple Attack Penalty 
When you make more than one attack 
action in a round, you take a penalty on attacks after the first. 
Your multiple attack penalty is –5 on your second attack and 
–10 on any subsequent attacks. Learn more on page 178.
Nonplayer Character (NPC)
 Nonplayer characters are a type 
of creature. They can represent a friendly, beneflcial, or 
challenging person in the game world, in addition to an 
adversary the player characters fight. Their mechanics can be 
built like that of a monster or a player character, depending on 
the GM's preference for the particular NPC. 
Occult Occult magic is the tradition that blends spiritual and 
mental essences, understanding the unexplainable, categorizing 
the bizarre, and otherwise accounting the ephemeral in a 
systematic way. 
Penalty
 Penalties are negative values that reduce a roll or a 
score. They come in three types: conditional, circumstance, 
and (rarely) item. If you have multiple penalties of a given 
type, you apply only the worst penalty and ignore the others. 
Some penalties that you gain due to inherent drawbacks 
in your choices, such as the multiple attack penalty, are 
untyped, in which case they are cumulative and all apply. See 
page 291 for more, and see "modifier" and "bonus" for the 
other numbers that afiect your rolls.
Perception
 Perception measures your character's ability to notice 
hidden objects and items. It also determines how quickly you 
notice danger and act when a battle's engaged. Your Perception 
modifier is equal to your Perception proficiency modifier plus 
your Wisdom modifier, as well as any other bonuses and 
penalties that apply. Learn more on page 301.
Physical Damage: Bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing damage 
fall under the umbrella term physical damage. An efiect that 
resists or triggers from physical damage (such as resistance 10  
to physical) works against any and all of these damage types.
Player
 All the actual people at the gaming table or playing 
remotely are the players in a Pathfinder game. Most control 
player characters (PCs), though the GM also controls monsters, 
the environment, and nonplayer characters (NPCs). 
Player Character (character or PC)
 A character controlled by a 
player, a player character goes on adventures, meets other 
characters, fights, grows, and pursues all sorts of other goals 
that the player imagines. In most games, each player except the 
GM will have one player character.
Power 
A power is a type of spell cast using Spell Points. Powers 
are always heightened to the maximum spell level a character 
can cast in that class (or half her level rounded up, if she isn't a 
spellcaster). Powers always have a descriptive term describing 
the type of power, such as "domain power" or "ki power." See 
page 193.Prerequisite
 Many feats and other abilities can be taken only 
if you meet their prerequisites. Prerequisites are often other 
feats, class talents, or proficiency levels.
Primal Primal magic is the tradition that blends material and vital 
essences, rooted in an instinctual connection to and faith in the 
natural world. 
Proficiency
 Your proficiency measures your training in the use of 
a weapon, armor, skill, saving throw, or some other check or 
score. There are flve ranks of proficiency: untrained, trained, 
expert, master, and legendary. Your proficiency modifier is 
equal to your level plus a value depending on your proficiency 
rank (–2 for untrained, 0 for trained, 1 for expert, 2 for master, 
or 3 for legendary). You're considered untrained unless an 
ability gives you better proficiency. Learn more on page 290.
Rare
 This rarity indicates that an ability, item, or spell is available 
to players only if the GM decides to include it in the game, 
typically through discovery during an adventure. If something 
is rare, its level is indicated in orange (the third-darkest shading 
of the rarities when viewed in black and white).
Reaction () A reaction is something you can do even when it 
is not your turn, as long as the reaction's trigger occurs. You 
typically can use only 1 reaction per turn, and regardless you 
can use only 1 on any given trigger. Learn more on page 297.
Requirement
 You must satisfy the requirements of an action, feat, 
spell, item, or other ability in order to use it. 
423 Resonance Points (RP)
 Every character has a pool of Resonance 
Points. Magic items require you to spend Resonance Points to 
activate them or wear them. Your RP are equal to your level 
plus your Charisma modifier. Learn more on page 376.
Retrain
 If you're unhappy with one of your character choices, you 
can spend time during downtime to change it. Learn more on 
page 318.Roll
 Any time you roll dice, you're making a roll. This could be a 
roll using a d20 (often called a check), a damage roll using dice 
other than d20s, or any other die roll.
Round
 Time during encounter mode is measured in rounds 
of roughly 6 seconds of time in the game world. During the 
course of a round, all creatures have a chance to act, in an order 
determined by initiative. Learn more on page 304.
Saving Throw (Save)
 When you are subjected to a dangerous 
efiect, you can often attempt a saving throw (sometimes 
called a "save") to mitigate the efiect. You roll a saving throw 
automatically—you don't have to spend an action or a reaction. 
Unlike most checks, the person who isn't acting rolls the d20 
for a saving throw, and the person who is acting generates 
the DC. There are three types of saving throws: Fortitude (based 
on Constitution and used to resist poisons, diseases, forced 
movement, and other physical effects), Reflex (based on 
Dexterity and used to mitigate effects that you could quickly 
dodge), and Will (based on Wisdom and used to resist effects 
that target your mind or spirit). Your saving throw modifier 
is equal to your proficiency modifier plus the ability modifier 
listed above, along with any other bonuses or penalties. Learn 
more on page 17.
Secret Check 
A secret check is a check the GM rolls in secret, 
typically because seeing the result of the die would bias the 
player's response to the efiect. See page 293 for more.
Signature Skill
 You can gain master and legendary proficiency in 
your signature skills, which are usually granted via your class.
Skill A skill represents a creature's ability to perform certain tasks 
that require experience or training. Skills typically have a list 
of uses you can perform even if you're untrained with the skill, 
followed by ones that require you to be trained with the skill. 
Your skill bonus is equal to your proficiency modifier plus the 
skill's associated ability modifier, along with any other bonuses 
and penalties. Learn more on page 142.
Skill Feat 
Skill feats are a type of general feat that relate 
speciflcally to a skill. You can select a skill feat only if you have 
the prerequisite proficiency rank in the associated skill.
Speed Speed is the number of feet that a character can move using 
the Stride action. You might have other Speeds that determine 
how far you can move with other actions. See page 310.
Spell Spells are magical effects generated by the Cast a Spell 
activity. Spells specify what they target, their effects upon 
successful casting, the actions needed to cast them, and how 
they can be resisted or negated. Spells and their rules appear 
in Chapter 7 (page 192).Spell DC See Spell Roll.
Spell Level
 A spell has a level ranging from 1 to 10. As a character 
gets more powerful, he can cast spells of a higher level.
Spell Roll 
You make a spell roll when you're testing the power of 
your magic against a particular target. Your spell roll modifier 
is equal to your proficiency modifier plus your key ability 
modifier, as well as any other bonuses and penalties (though 
these are quite rare). Many of your spells will call for saving 
throws against your spell DC (10 plus your spell roll modifier).
Spellcaster A spellcaster is a character whose class or archetype 
grants them the spellcasting class feature. NPCs and monsters 
might also be considered spellcasters if they primarily rely on 
spells to be efiective. The ability to cast powers or innate spells 
does not by itself make a character a spellcaster.
Strength (Str)
 This physical ability score measures your brawn.
Stride You can move up to your Speed with the Stride action, 
which appears on page 308.Strike The Strike action lets you make an attack. You can find it 
on page 308.Success A success is a degree of success that results from a check 
result equal to or greater than the Diflculty Class or a result of 
natural 20THat is lower than the Diflculty Class. If a check has 
no success entry, that means there is no efiect on a success.
Touch Armor Class (TAC)
 All creatures in the game have a Touch 
Armor Class. This score represents how hard it is to hit and 
damage the creature with an attack that can bypass some of 
the protection granted by armor. Your TAC is equal to 10 plus 
your Dexterity modifier (up to your armor's Dexterity modifier 
cap), plus your proficiency modifier with your armor, plus 
your armor's item bonus to TAC and any other bonuses and 
penalties. Learn more on page 176.
Trait
 A trait is an indicator that a feat, action, item, spell, monster, 
or some other rules item obeys special rules defined by the trait 
or interacts with other rules in a special way. For instance, a fire 
spell or a monster made of fire has the fire trait. You'll find a 
glossary of traits on page 414.Trap
 Traps are the most common type of hazard, constructed 
intentionally to harm or obstruct trespassers.
Trigger
 A trigger is a discrete event or action that must occur in 
order for you to use a reaction or a free action. Sometimes spell 
effects, monsters, traps, or other effects in the game respond 
to triggers. Learn more on page 297.
Turn
 Over the course of a round, each creature receives a single turn.; 
it can typically take up to 3 actions on its turn (see page 304).Uncommon Something of uncommon rarity isn't available to 
everyone. It requires special training or comes from a particular 
part of the world. Some character choices can automatically 
give a character access to uncommon options, and the GM 
can allow access for anyone she chooses. If something is 
uncommon, its level is indicated in red (the second-darkest 
shading of the rarities when viewed in black and white).
Unique The unique rarity applies to anything that's one of a 
kind. Since this book doesn't include artifacts, there aren't any 
entries that are unique, though some of the playtest monsters 
are unique. If something is unique, its level is indicated in light 
blue (the lightest shading of the rarities when viewed in black 
and white).Wisdom (Wis) This mental ability score measures your awareness 
and intuition.424 INDEXAbadar 72, 288aberrant bloodline 130ability boosts 18, 43ability flaws
 18ability modifier 8, 20ability scores
 18–21
 generating
 18–20
 rolling (alternative generation)
 21abjuration school
 137, 194
AC
 (see Armor Class) accelerated (condition)
 320 Acrobatics (skill)
 144–145
actions 7, 296
 reading action entries
 8 Activate an Item
 376activities 8, 296adamantine 354adamantine strikes (monk) 98additive
 47
Administer First Aid (action, Medicine)
 152advanced alchemy (alchemist)
 45–46aerial combat
 315afflictions 324–325
age 16 Aid (reaction)
 307alchemical alacrity (alchemist) 47
alchemical items 359–369
alchemical poisons 360alchemist 44–51
 class features
 45–47
 feats
 48–51
alignment 16ammunition 179, 377
anathema (cleric)
 70–71
anathema (druid)
 80ancestry 13, 22–37
 feats
 23, 43 Hit Points
 22 reading ancestry entries
 22–23
angelic bloodline 130animal companions 284–287
animal totem 55animals 189aquatic combat
 315 Arcana (skill)
 145–146
arcane focus (wizard)
 136arcane school (wizard)
 136, 137–138
arcane spell list
 199–200
arcane spellcasting (wizard)
 135–136
archetypes
 279–283
area
 196, 299armor 176–177
 donning and removing
 175 magic item runes 370–375
 traits 177
Armor Class (AC)
 16–17, 176, 292
armor mastery (fighter) 88armor mastery (paladin) 107armored fortitude (paladin)
 107 Arrest a Fall (reaction)
 309asleep (condition) 320 Asmodeus 72, 288 Assist (action) 307 Athletics (skill)
 146–147
Attack of Opportunity (reaction, 
  
 fighter) 87, 306
aura 298, 299aura of justice (paladin) 107backgrounds
 38–39
Balance (action, Acrobatics)
 144
barbarian 52–61
 class features
 53–56
 feats
 57–61
 totems 55–56
bard
 62–67
 class features
 63–65 feats
 66–67basic actions 307–309
battlefleld surveyor (fighter)
 88blinded (condition) 320blindsense 301blindsight 301–302
bloodline (sorcerer)
 127, 129–130
bolstered
 319bonus 8–9, 290–291
Borrow an Arcane Spell (Arcana)
 145bravery (fighter)
 88 Break Grapple (action, Athletics)
 146 Break Open (action, Athletics)
 146 Breathe Deep (action)
 309bright light 301broken (condition)
 175, 320 Bulk 17, 174–175, 191
Burrow (action)
 309burrow Speed
 310burst 298, 299 Calistria 72, 288cantrips 193casting spells 192–196
cavalier (archetype)
 279–280
Cayden Cailean
 72, 288champion powers (paladin)
 106channel energy (cleric) 71chaos (alignment) 16character creation
 11–17
character sheet 429–431 Charisma (ability) 18check penalty 176, 190, 371checks 8–9, 290–293
class 13, 42–141
 reading class entries
 42–43
cleric 68–77
 class features
 69–71
 deities 72–73
 domains 73 feats
 74–77
cleric (archetype)
 280climate
 340–341
Climb (action, Athletics)
 146climb Speed 310code of conduct (paladin) 105–106
Coerce (Intimidation)
 150coins, currency
 174, 175, 347
cold iron
 355combat
 (see encounter mode) combat fiexibility (fighter)
 88 Command Activation (action)
 376 Command an Animal (action, Nature)
 153common terms 9–10, 420–423
compositions 64, 66 Conceal an Object (action, Stealth) 158concealed (condition) 302–303, 320
Concentrate on a Spell (action)
 197concentration
 196–197
conditions 319–324
cone 298, 299confused (condition) 320–321
conjuration school
 137–138, 194
Constitution (ability) 18controlling undead
 75cost of living 188, 189, 334counteracting effects 319cover
 314 Cover Tracks (action, Survival)
 159 Craft (Crafting)
 148, 149, 354, 357
Crafting (skill) 147–148, 149
crafting magic items 346 Crawl (action)
 307 Create a Diversion (action,
  Deception) 148–149
Create Forgery (Society)
 157
critical brutality (barbarian) 54critical failure
 292critical hits 178, 308critical specialization effects
 183critical success 292daily preparations
 317, 332, 378
damage 293–294
 damage dice, counting 179 damage dice, increasing
 91 doubling and halving damage 293 massive damage
 296darkness 197, 301
darkvision 302darkwood
 355425dazzled (condition) 321 DC  (see Diflculty Class) dead (condition) 321deafened (condition) 321death and dying
 295–296
 instant death
 296death effects
 295–296
debilitating strike (free action, rogue)
 120
debilitations
 120 Deception (skill) 148–150
Decipher Writing (Society) 157–158
deiflc weapon (paladin)
 106deities 72–73, 288–289
deity and domain (cleric) 70 Delay (free action)
 307demonic bloodline 130 Demoralize (action, Intimidation)
 150–151
Dents 175deny advantage (barbarian)
 54deny advantage (rogue)
 120 Desna 72, 288devastating strikes (barbarian)
 55 Dexterity (ability)
 18 Dexterity modifier cap
 176die rolls
 8–9, 290–293
diflcult terrain 312, 332 Diflculty Class (DC) 8, 291–292, 336–338
dim light 301 Diplomacy (skill) 150 Disable a Device (action, Thievery)
 159 Disarm (action, Athletics)
 147
dispelling 197disrupting 196, 297, 377
divination school
 138, 194divine spell list 200divine spellcasting (cleric) 69domains 73double debilitation (rogue)
 120double elixir (alchemist) 47
downtime
 7, 144, 318, 333–335
Drain Arcane Focus (free action, wizard)
 136draconic bloodline 130dragon totem 55drained (condition) 321 Drop (free action)
 307 Drop Prone (action)
 307drowning and sufiocating
 315druid 78–85 class features
 79–81 feats
 82–85
druidic language (druid) 81druidic order (druid)
 80–81duplicate effects
 299duration
 196–197, 297, 330
dwarf (ancestry)
 24–25
dying (rules) 294–296
dying (condition) 321effects 7–8, 297–299
elf (ancestry) 26–27
empower bombs (alchemist)
 46enchantment school 138, 194encounter mode 7, 304–315, 328–329
 aerial combat
 315 aquatic combat
 315 basic actions 307–309
 initiative
 304, 305, 331–332
 mounted combat
 315 movement
 310–314
 turns 304–306
encumbered (condition)
 321enervated (condition)
 321enfeebled (condition) 321enhancements 89, 99, 120, 294entangled (condition) 321environment
 340–343
 climate
 340–341
 hazards
 341–343
 terrain 340equipment 174–191
 alchemical items 359–369
 animals 189 armor and shields 176–177
 Bulk 174, 175
 coins 174, 175
 cost of living 188, 189 formulas 188–189
 gear 184–189
 item damage 175 item quality 190 magic items 344–346, 370–413
 services 188, 189 sizes
 191 snares
 357–358
 special items 356 weapons
 178–183
 wielding items 175 Erastil 72, 288 Escape (action, Acrobatics)
 144
ethnicity, human
 35evasion (ranger)
 114evasion (rogue)
 120evil (alignment)
 16, 71evocation school
 138, 194expanded resonance (alchemist)
 47
Experience Points (XP)
 5, 278, 339expert spellcaster (bard)
 65expert spellcaster (cleric)
 71expert spellcaster (druid)
 81expert spellcaster (sorcerer)
 129expert spellcaster (wizard)
 137exploration mode
 7, 316–317, 329–333
 exploration tactics
 316–317
 rest and daily preparations
 317, 332, 378
 social tactics 317failure
 292falling 145, 310–311
familiars 287fascinated (condition)
 321fatigued (condition)
 322feats
 160–173
 ancestry 23, 43; see ancestry entries class 43; see class entries general 43, 160–173
 heritage 23 reading feat entries
 8 skill 43, 160–173
Feint (action, Deception)
 150fey bloodline
 130fierce fiurry (monk)
 98fighter 86–95
 class features
 87–88
 feats
 89–95
fighter (archetype)
 280–281
flnesse striker (rogue)
 119first compositions (bard)
 64fianking 313–314
flat check
 292flat-footed (condition)
 322fieeing (condition) 322 Flurry of Blows (action, monk)
 97 Fly (action) 309fiy Speed 310 Focus Activation (action)
 376formula book (alchemist) 46, 51
forced movement
 311formulas 148, 149, 188–189, 370
free actions
 7, 296–297
friendly (condition) 322frightened (condition) 322fumble  (see critical failure)
 fury totem 56 Game Master (GM) 5, 6, 9game mastering 326–343
Garundi (ethnicity) 35 Gather Information (Diplomacy)
 150gear 184–189
general feats
 43, 160–173
giant totem 56 GM  (see Game Master) gnome (ancestry) 28–29
goblin (ancestry) 30–31
Golarion 9good (alignment) 16, 71 Gorum 72, 288 Gozreh
 72, 288 Grab Edge (reaction, Acrobatics)
 144
grabbed (condition) 322graceful expertise (monk)
 97graceful legend (monk) 98graceful mastery (monk) 98 Grapple (action, Athletics)
 146–147
Gray Maiden (archetype)
 281–282
grid 311half-elf (ancestry)
 36426half-orc (ancestry)
 36halfling (ancestry) 32–33
hampered (condition)
 323 Handle an Animal (action, Nature)
 153 Hardness
 175, 354hazardous terrain
 312, 332–333
hazards
 341–343
heavy armor expertise (fighter)
 88helpful (condition) 323 Hero Points
 17, 300
hero's deflance (paladin)
 107 Hide (action, Stealth) 158 High Jump (action, Athletics)
 147
Hit Points (HP)
 9, 14, 22, 42–43, 294–296
 ancestry 22 class 42–43
 temporary 296holy smite (paladin) 107hostile (conditions) 323hostile, acting 197 HP  (see Hit Points)
 human (ancestry) 34–37
Hunt Target (action, ranger)
 113 Identify Alchemy (Crafting)
 148 Identify Magic (Arcana)
 145 Identify Magic (Nature)
 153 Identify Magic (Occultism) 154 Identify Magic (Religion)
 156illusion school 138, 194immobile (condition) 323immunity 294 object immunities 175imperial bloodline 130 Impersonate (Deception)
 149improved evasion (ranger)
 114improved evasion (rogue)
 120improved fiexibility (fighter)
 88improved juggernaut (barbarian)
 54improvised weapons
 178incredible movement (monk)
 98indifferent (condition)
 323infused 47
indomitable will (barbarian) 54–55
initiative
 9, 304, 305, 331–332
innate spells
 192–193
Intelligence (ability) 18 Interact (action) 307 Intimidation (skill)
 150–151
Invest an Item
 377
invisible 303 Iomedae 72, 288 Irori
 72, 289item damage 175item level
 174
item quality 190item size
 191items  (see equipment) juggernaut (barbarian) 54 Keleshite (ethnicity)
 35 Kellid (ethnicity)
 35key ability
 13, 42knocked out 294–295, 296, 324
Lamashtu 72, 289languages 22, 40–41 sign language 40–41law (alignment)
 16 Leap (action)
 308 Learn a Divine Spell (Religion)
 156 Learn a Primal Spell (Nature)
 154 Learn an Arcane Spell (Arcana)
 146 Learn an Occult Spell (Occultism)
 154legendary armor (paladin) 107legendary spellcaster (bard)
 65legendary spellcaster (cleric) 71legendary spellcaster (druid) 81legendary spellcaster (sorcerer)
 129legendary spellcaster (wizard)
 137leveling up
 278, 339 Lie (Deception) 149light 197, 301
line 298, 299line of efiect 196, 298–299
litany 107 Long Jump (action, Athletics)
 147
Lore (skill)
 151–152, 153
low-light vision
 302magic items 344–413
 activation
 346, 376–377
 ammunition 377
 armor and weapons
 377–378
 crafting 148, 346, 405 investiture
 346, 377
 level
 344
 materials
 354–355
 method of use 345–346
 oils and potions 378 rarity 345 Resonance Points
 17, 376, 377
 runes 370–375
 scrolls
 378–379, 407
 staves
 379 treasure tables
 349–353
 traits 344–345
 trinkets 379–380
 wands
 380, 413magic strikes (monk) 98 Maintain Balance (free action, Acrobatics)
 144
Make an Impression (Diplomacy)
 150 Maneuver in Flight (action, Acrobatics)
 145master spellcaster (bard)
 65master spellcaster (cleric) 71master spellcaster (druid) 81master spellcaster (sorcerer)
 129master spellcaster (wizard)
 137master strike (free action, rogue)
 120masterful hunter (ranger) 114 Material Casting (action)
 195–196
materials
 354–355
Medicine (skill) 152metal strikes (monk) 98metamagic  66, 71, 82, 107, 131, 139
Mighty Rage (free action, barbarian)
 54mithral 355modifiers 8–9, 290–291
monk 96–103
 class features
 97–98
 feats
 99–103
mount (action) 309mounted combat
 315movement
 310–314
multiple attack penalty
 178, 305multiplying 299muses (bard)
 64mutagen crafting (alchemist) 47
Mwangi (ethnicity)
 35narrow surfaces
 312 Nature (skill)
 152–154
nature's edge (ranger)
 114necromancy school
 138, 194 Nethys 72, 289 Nidalese (ethnicity) 35nonlethal attacks
 182, 294nonplayer character (NPC)
 10 Norgorber 72, 289 NPC  (see nonplayer character)
 oath
 107occult spell list 200–201
occult spellcasting (bard)
 63–64 Occultism (skill) 154onset 325, 346open 89, 99 Operate Activation (action)
 376–377
orichalcum 355paladin 104–111
 class features
 105–107
 feats
 108–111
Palm an Object (action, Thievery)
 159paralyzed (condition)
 323path to perfection (monk)
 98penalty 8–9, 290–291
Perception
 17, 301–303
perfected form (monk) 98 Perform (action, Performance)
 155 Performance (skill)
 154–156, 157
Performance traits
 155persistent damage (condition) 323petrifled (condition) 323 Pharasma 72, 289 Pick a Lock (action, Thievery)
 159pirate (archetype)
 282player
 5playtest
 4, 6, 326 Point Out (action)
 309poisons 360427poor quality 190potency runes 370–371
powerful flst (monk)
 97 Practice a Trade (Lore)
 151–152, 153
prepared spells
 192press
 89 Price 174, 345
primal spell list 201–202
primal spellcasting (druid) 79–80proficiency
 8–9, 43, 290–291, 336
prone (condition)
 323–324
property runes
 370, 371–375
quick (condition) 324
Quick Alchemy (action, alchemist) 46rage (action, barbarian) 53raging resistance (barbarian)
 54 Raise a Shield (action) 309range and reach
 297–298, 313
ranger 112–117
 class features
 113–114
 feats
 115–117
rarity 10, 198, 345reactions
 7, 297, 305–306
Read Esoterica (Occultism)
 154 Read Magic (Arcana)
 146 Read Scripture (Religion)
 156–157
Ready (action)
 308 Recall Knowledge (action, Arcana)
 145 Recall Knowledge (action, Lore)
 151
Recall Knowledge (action, Nature)
 153 Recall Knowledge (action, Occultism)
 154 Recall Knowledge (action, Religion)
 156 Recall Knowledge (action, Society)
 157
recovery saving throw
 295 Religion (skill)
 156–157
reload
 179 Repair (Crafting)
 147
Request (action, Diplomacy)
 150reroll
 293resistance
 294 Resonance Points
 17, 346, 376, 377
rest
 317, 332, 334
restrained (condition)
 324
result
 291, 292retraining
 318, 334–335
Retributive Strike (reaction, paladin)
 106righteous ally (paladin) 106–107
rituals 274–277
rogue
 118–125
 class features
 119–120
 feats
 121–125
rogue (archetype)
 282–283
rounding
 299 Rovagug
 72, 289runes 370–375
 etching 370 potency 370–371
 property
 370, 371–375
 transferring 370 upgrading 372 Sarenrae
 73, 289saving throws
 10, 17scent 302screening
 314scrolls
 378–379, 407
second path to perfection (monk)
 98secret checks
 144, 293
Seek (action) 308seen 302 Sense Direction (Survival)
 158sensed (condition) 303, 324
senses 301–303
services 188, 189 Shelyn 73, 289shields 176–177
 attacking with
 177
Shield Block (reaction)
 309 Shoanti (ethnicity) 35 Shove (action, Athletics)
 147
sick (condition) 324
signature skills
 43, 144
silver
 355size
 22, 191, 311–312, 313
skills 142–159
 Acrobatics
 144–145
 adjudicating
 337–338
 Arcana
 145–146
 Athletics
 146–147
 checks 142–144
 Crafting 147–148, 149
 DCs 142 Deception 148–150
 Diplomacy 150 feats
 43, 160–173
 increases
 43 Intimidation
 150–151
 Lore
 151–152, 153
 Medicine 152 Nature
 152–154
 Occultism 154 Performance
 154–156, 157
 Religion
 156–157
 signature
 43, 144
 Society 157–158
 Stealth 158 Survival
 158–159
 Thievery
 159slippery mind (rogue)
 120slowed (condition)
 324
sluggish (condition) 324
snares
 171, 357–358
Sneak (action, Stealth) 158sneak attack (rogue)
 119 Society (skill) 157–158
Somatic Casting (action)
 196sorcerer
 126–133
 bloodlines 129–130
 class features
 127–130
 feats
 131–133
sorcerer spellcasting (sorcerer)
 128speaking 308 Speed 310 Speed penalty 177
 Speed reduction
 320 Speed, travel
 316spell repertoire (bard)
 64spell repertoire (sorcerer)
 128spellbook (wizard)
 136spells 192–277
 area
 196 attacks
 197 cantrips 193 casting 195–196
 descriptions 203–273
 dispelling 197 disrupting 196, 297, 377
 duration
 196–197
 heightening 192 innate
 192–193
 lists 198–202
 magical traditions 194 powers
 193–194
 preparing
 192 range 196 reading spell entries
 198 rituals 274–277
 rolls and DCs
 290–291
 schools 194 spontaneous 192 target 196 traits 194–195
 trigger stimulus 197 walls
 198spirit totem 56spontaneous heightening (bard)
 65spontaneous heightening (sorcerer)
 129spontaneous spells 192 Squeeze (Acrobatics)
 145STage a Performance
 (Performance)
 155–156, 157
stance 89, 99STand (action) 308staves
 379STeal an Object (action, Thievery)
 159STealth (skill) 158, 302STep (action) 308STrength (ability)
 18STride (action) 305, 308STrike (action) 305, 308studied resonance (alchemist)
 46stunned (condition) 324
stupefled (condition) 324
Subsist on the Streets (Society)
 157
success 292428superstition totem 56surprise attack (rogue)
 119 Survival (skill)
 158–159
Survive in the Wild (Survival)
 158–159
swift target (ranger) 114 Swim (action, Athletics)
 147
swim Speed 310 TAC 
 (see Touch Armor Class)
 Take Cover (action)
 308 Taldan (ethnicity)
 35temporary Hit Points
 296terrain 312–313, 332–333, 340THievery (skill)
 159third path to perfection (monk)
 98threatening
 313–314
Tian (ethnicity) 35tireless rage (barbarian)
 55 Torag
 73, 289totem (barbarian) 53–54, 55–56
Touch Armor Class (TAC)
 16, 176, 292 Track (action, Survival)
 159trackless step (ranger) 114traits  10, 414–419transmutation school
 138, 194traps  (see hazards)
 travel Speed
 316treasure
 344–413
 alchemical items 359–369
 magic items 376–413 new characters
 348 nonmagical 356 party gain 347–348
 runes 370–375
 snares
 357–358
 tables 348–353
Treat Disease (Medicine)
 152 Treat Poison (action, Medicine)
 152tremorsense
 302trigger 8, 297, 311
trigger stimulus 197 Trip (action, Athletics)
 147
Tumble Through (action, Acrobatics)
 145turn 304–306
Ulfen (ethnicity) 35unarmed attacks
 178, 183unarmed mastery (monk) 98unburdened
 24
unconscious (condition) 294–295, 296, 324
unfriendly (condition) 324
universalist wizards
 138unseen (condition) 303, 324
Urgathoa
 73, 289 Varisian (ethnicity)
 35 Verbal Casting (action)
 196 Vudrani (ethnicity)
 35walls
 198wands
 380weakness
 294weapon expertise (ranger)
 114weapon expertise (paladin)
 107weapon fury (barbarian)
 54weapon legend (fighter)
 88weapon mastery (ranger)
 114weapon mastery (fighter)
 88weapon mastery (paladin)
 107weapon specialization (fighter)
 88weapon tricks (rogue)
 120weapons
 178–183
 attack rolls
 178 traits 182–183
 critical specialization effects
 183 groups
 182 improvised
 178 magic item runes 370–375
 multiple attack penalty
 178 range 178–179
 wielding 174, 179, 182
wild empathy (druid)
 81wild stride (ranger) 114 Wisdom (ability) 18wizard
 134–141
 class features
 135–138
 feats
 139–141
wizard (archetype)
 283 XP (see Experience Points)
 Zon-Kuthon
 73, 289
